■t. 


•m  < 


,# 


% 


^^     ^    %-cta. 


A 

GRAMMAR 


OF  THE 


ASANTE  AND  FANTE  LANGUAGE 

CALLED  TSHI  fCHWEE,  TWI]. 


GRAMMAR 


OF   THE 


ASANTE  AND  FANTE  LANGUAGE 

CALLED  TSHI  [CHWEE,  TWI]: 

BASED   ON   THE  AKLTAPEM  DIALECT 

WITH  RRFERKNOE    TO   IHK  O'l'HER  (AlvAN  AND  FANTE)  IJIAI.KCT.S 


BY 

REV.  J.  G.   GHRISTALLER, 

OF  THE    BASEL    GERMAN    EVANGELICAL    MISSION 
ON  THE  GOLD  COAST,  W.  A. 


BASEL:  1875. 
PRINTED   FOR  THE  BASEL  EVANG.  MISSIONARY  SOCIETY. 

Also  sold  bv  Trubner  &  Co.  57.  59.  Ludgate  Hill,  London, 
AND  C.  BtjHL,  Christiansborg,  Gold  Coast,  W.  A. 


PREFACE. 


'I'he  Tshi  languafie,  of  which  a  Grammar  is  presented  in  this  book, 
is  spoken  and  understood  throughout  the  Gold  Coast  territories  and 
inland  countries,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  Introduction  §  1.  On  the 
name  of  the  language,  see  Introd.  §  3.  —  Though  several  European 
nations  had  intercourse  with  the  natives  and  formed  settlements  on 
the  Gold  Coast  since  the  15th  or  even  14th  century  (French  merchants 
of  Diej>pe  [of  the  Kouen  Trading  Company  formed  in  1H66],  1383-141.3, 
and  afterwards  since  1578;  the  Portuguese,  1453  or  1471  and  1481 
to  1643;  the  English,  since  1551;  the  Dutch,  1595-1870;  the  Danes, 
from  about  1G40  to  1850;  the  Swedes,  previous  to  1652  and  at  the  least 
till  1663;  the  Germans  of  Brandenburg  or  Prussia  1682-1720;  besides 
the  trading  vessels  from  Spain,  America,  Hamburg,  Bremen,  &c.) ;  and 
though  many  Negroes  learned  the  Portuguese  or  Dutch  or  Danish  or 
English  language :  yet  there  has  almost  nothing  of  the  native  language 
or  languages  been  known  in  Europe  down  to  the  present  century. 
The  earliest  specimens  of  the  'J'shi  language  we  find  in  a  book  of  the 
Ivev.  W.  J.  Midler,  of  Harburg  near  Hamburg,  published  in  German 
1673,  containing  about  500  words  in  the  Fante  dialect  of  Cape  Coast, 
and  another  of  Ch.  FroUen,  a  mulatto  of  the  Gold  Coast,  educated  in 
Denmark,  who  wrote  a  scanty  grammar  of  the  Fante  and  Akra 
languages,  together  with  the  Ten  Commandments,  the  Apostolic  Creed, 
the  Lord's  Prayer  and  Bible  words  on  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper, 
in  both  languages,  printed  in   1764.    See  hereafter  page  VL  VII. 

The  Kev.  H.  N.  lliis  of  the  Basel  Mission  on  the  Gold  Coast  wrote 
two  Grammars  of  the  Tshi  language,  one  in  German,  and  one  in  English, 
published  in  1853  and  1854  (the  full  titles  see  below  on  page  VIH), 
thereby  opening,  as  it  were,  the  path  through  an  untrodden  wilderness 
in  the  right  direction.  The  author  of  the  present  work,  having  had 
the  benefit  of  being  initiated  into  the  language  by  Mr.  Kiis  at  Basel 
in  1851  and  1852,  has  never  ceased  to  apprize  the  masterly  and  at  the 
same  time  modest  manner  in  which  his  esteemed  and  beloved  teacher 
turned  to  account  the  materials  which  he  had  been  able  to  gather 
during  his  rather  short  stay  in  Africa  (1845-1849).  Though  Mr.  Uiis 
himself  calls  his  representation  of  the  leading  features  of  the  gram- 
matical structure  of  the  language  imperfect  and  initiatory,  yet  those  two 


II  PREFACE, 


j)iiblications  sufficed  so  far,  that  his  successor  and  his  fellow  labourers 
could  do  without  a  new  grammar  for  a  longer  time,  and  preferred  to 
turn  their  attention  and  apply  their  time  and  strength  to  practical 
missionary  work  and  to  the  lilerary  cultivation  of  the  language  at  once. 
The  said  successor  of  Mr.  Riis  in  the  literary  branch  of  the  Basel 
Missionary  Society's  work  in  the  Akuapem  and  Akem  Countries  had, 
soon  after  his  arrival\at  Akropong  in  1853,  the  further  advantage  of 
the  assistance  of  young  intelligent  Natives,  who  in  the  Missionary 
Schools  had  already  received  a  valuable  amount  of  instruction  in 
English  as  well  as  in  attempts  of  writing  their  own  language ;  with 
them  he  could  proceed  to  translation  ivork,  discussing  every  difficulty 
and  obscurity  that  presented  itself  either  in  the  native  or  in  the  English 
and  Bible  languages.  The  pupils  of  the  Catechist  Institution,  and 
assistants  that  had  come  forth  from  among  them,  were  made  to  trans- 
late, orally  and  on  paper,  from  Bible  History,  from  the  Bible  itself 
and  other  English  books,  and  to  write  down  old  stories,  fables  of 
the  natives  or  historical  facts,  and  essays  on  various  subjects;  public 
assemblies  were  attended,  and  the  speeches  delivered  in  them  were 
dictated  from  memory  by  the  native  assistant  and  penned  down  by 
the  missionary;  the  collection  of proverhs,  which  Mr.  Eiis  had  brought 
to  the  number  of  268,  in  course  of  time  swelled  to  ten  times  that 
number.  In  these  and  other  ways,  also  by  intercourse  with  other 
natives,  young  and  old,  the  knowledge  of  the  language  was  increased, 
the  sounds  of  it  were  more  closely  investigated  and  clearly  distin- 
guished, the  laws  of  the  language  were  found  out  more  and  more,  and 
sufficient  confidence  was  obtained  that  the  books  prepared  for  printing 
were  no  unripe  productions.  At  the  same  time  every  opportunity  to 
get  information  on  the  other  dialects  was  eagerly  embraced,  and  the 
translations  in  Akra  or  Ga  (introd.  §  5  B  1.),  which  were  likewise  the 
result  of  th(!  co-operation  of  European  missionaries,  especially  the  Rev. 
J.  Zimmermann,  with  native  assistants,  were  compared  and  turned  to 
advantage  for  the  translations  in  Tshi,  the  more  so,  as  the  native 
assistants  usually  had  a  good  knowledge  of  the  Akra  language  besides 
that  of  their  own.  Thus,  in  the  course  of  time,  all  the  books  contained 
in  the  list  on  pag.  VIII.  IX.  were  printed;  many  of  them  were  prepared, 
by  the  author  of  the  present  publication,  on  the  Missionary  Stations  at 
Akropong  1853-58,  1866-68,  Aburi  1862-65,  Kyebi  (in  the  Akem 
country)  1865  and  66,  many  also  were  carried  through  the  press  by  the 
same,  during  his  stay  in  Europe  1858-62  and  since  1869.  But  now 
the  edition  of  a  new  Grammar  could  no  longer  be  postponed.  —  Among 
other  preliminary  attempts  to  a  new  grammar,  a  vernacular  grammar 
had   been    written  in    1863,    by    which    a    grammatical    terminology    in 


PREFACE.  Ill 


Tshi  was  created.  Tlie  manuscript  was  copied  by  native  teachers  for 
the  use  in  the  Mission  Schools.  Some  years  later,  after  the  whole  Bible 
in  Tshi  had  been  published,  it  was  rewritten  by  its  autlior,  but  in- 
stead of  having  it  printed,  it  was  thought  better,  to  write  first  the 
present  grammar  in  English,  following  in  various  arrangements  the 
course  pursued  in  that  previous  work,  as  it  soeniod  to  be  prescribed 
by  the  peculiarities  of  African,   compared   with  European  languages. 

The  present  work  is  intended  for  Missionaries  and  oilier  Europeans 
that  may  be  desirous  of  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  chief  among  the 
native  languages  of  the  Gold  Coast,  as  well  as  for  educated  Natives, 
whether  they  have  received  their  education  in  English  only,  or  be 
already  acquainted  with  reading  and  writing  their  own  language,  as 
those  trained  in  the  Basel  Missionary  Institutions  on  the  Gold  Coast. 
It  is  also  hoped  that  this  work  will  be  welcome  to  philologists  inter- 
ested and  engaged  in  the  pursuits  of  science  concerning  African  and 
general  Linguistry  and  Ethnology. 

As  to  the  Alphabet  adopted  in  reducing  the  Tshi  language  to  writ- 
ing, Mr.  Miis  kept  to  the  'Rules  for  reducing  unwritten  lanrjuafjes 
to  alphabetical  ivriliw)  in  Roman  characters,  tvith  reference  especially 
to  the  lanrjuages  spoUen  in  Africa\  laid  down  by  the  Rev.  H.  Venn 
of  the  Church  Missionary  Society  in  1848,  as  nearly  as  the  peculiar 
character  of  the  language  would  permit.  In  1854  these  '■Rules''  were 
superseded  by  the  'Standard  Alphabet  for  reducing  univritten  languages 
and  foreign  graphic  s/jstcms  to  a  uniform  orthograpjhij  in  European 
letters''  by  Dr.  R.  Lepsius,  Professor  (now  Privy  Counselor  of  the 
Government)  at  Berlin,  which  alphabet  was  recommended,  approved  and 
adopted  by  the  Church  Miss.  Soc,  the  Wesleyan  Miss.  Soc,  the  London 
Miss.  Soc.  and  several  other  Missionary  Societies  in  England,  Germany, 
France  and  America,  and  in  which,  since  1854,  a  great  number  of 
books  in  more  than  twenty  African  and  many  other  languages  have 
been  printed.  The  necessity  as  well  as  the  propriety  of  our  making 
use  of  that  'Standard  AlphabeC  is  without  question  to  any  one  acquain- 
ted with  the  book,  a  second  edition  of  which  was  printed  in  18G3. 
Some  sounds,  indeed,  occur  in  Tshi,  which  were  not  yet  contained 
in  the  Standard  Alphabet,  nor  in  the  120  languages  to  which  it  has 
been  applied  in  the  second  edition;  but,  the  system,  on  whi«h  the 
Standard  Alphabet  has  been  construed,  being  elastic  enough  to  admit 
of  reduction  or  enlargement  without  alteration  in  its  essential  principles, 
after  a  discussion  on  the  nature  of  those  sounds  between  the  author 
of  the  Standard  Alphabet  and  the  Writer  of  this,  signs  were  provided 
for  those  peculiar  souuls,  and  approved  by  the  fellow  labourers  of 
the  latter  in  Africa,  so  that  the  orthography  of  this  language  was 
definitely  settled  in  1869,  previous  to  the  printing  of  the  entire  Bible 
in  Tshi  in  1870  and  1871. 

Concerning  the  Orthography  of  foreign,  especially  biblical,  lyroper 
names,    we  refer    to  §  11    of    this  (Jrainniar    and    to    the  Stories  from 


IV  PREFACE. 


General  History,  translated  into  the  Tslii  language,  page  IV.,  but  have 
to  add  the  following  remark.  In  Scripture  proper  names  we  usually 
write  the  letters  which  the  names  have  in  the  Latin,  English  or  Ger- 
man Bible  and  sound  them  according  to  the  Standard  Alphabet,  omitt- 
ing such  letters  as  are  not  heard  in  pronunciation,  and  modifying 
some  terminations  as  in  the  Italian  Bible.  To  the  Hebrew  letter 
represented  by  the  English  J,  we  reserved  the  Hebrew  and  German 
found,  and  consequently  replaced  it  by  the  letter  Y  of  the  English 
and  the  Standard  Alphabet.  In  the  Akra,  Ewe  and  Kru  languages, 
the  vowel  sign  I  is  used  in  this  case,  as  in  Greek.  For  the  sake  of 
conformity  with  those  languages,  we  should  not  feel  disinclined  to 
follow  the  same  course  in  future  publications.  The  letter  I,  besides 
requiring  less  space,  will  be  less  objectionable  than  Y,  to  eyes  accusto- 
med to  the  English  J  in  such  names,  though  the  sound  will  actually 
be  that  of  Y.  (The  letter  J  cannot  be  used,  because  the  Stand.  Alph. 
replaces  its  German  sound  by  Y,  and  its  English  sound  by  Dz ;  but 
the  latter  sound  ought  not  to  be  intruded  upon  foreign  languages,  in- 
stead of  the  simple  Y  sound  of  the  original  Hebrew  name.)  Consistency 
with  the  principles  of  the  Standard  Alphabet,  however,  favours  the 
retention  of  Y  in  the  names  in  question. 

The  preceding  notices  on  the  alphabet  and  orthography  in  Tshi 
books  are  given  especially  with  regard  to  the  writers  and  readers  of 
the  'Mfantsi  Granmiar'  by  D.  L.  Carr  and  J.  P.  Brown,  Cape  Coast, 
18G8,  of  which  the  writer  of  this  in  1870  obtained  a  copy  kindly 
procured  to  him  by  the  Rev.  J.  Baratt  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist 
Missionary  Society.  This  attempt  of  natives  to  reduce  the  'Mfantse 
language'  to  writing,  following  after  the  earlier  attempts  of  Ch.  Protten, 
W.  A.  Hanson  and  Timothi/  Laincj,  could  not  hut  be  exceedingly  wel- 
come to  one  engaged  in  similar  pursuits,  yet  only  slightly  acquainted 
with  the  Fante  dialects.  But  the  orthographic  system  of  the  '■Mfantsi 
Grammar',  based  on  the  English  alphabet  (only  c  =  s  or  /  being 
borrowed  from  H.  N.  Riis),  is  by  no  means  satisfactory.  Especially 
the  means  employed  for  the  representation  of  the  vowel  system,  which 
in  Tshi  contains  more  and  finer  distinctions  than  in  the  English  or 
any  other  European  language,  are  quite  insufficient.  For  10  pure  and 
7  nasal  vowel  sounds,  each  of  them  long  and  short,  or  for  about  34 
distinct  vowels,  the  Mf.  Gr.  uses  only  5  letters,  3  of  them  with  two- 
fold sounds;  and  to  indicate  one  of  those  nasal  (but  nevertheless  simple) 
vowels,  two  or  three  letters  arc  used;  e.  g.  the  words  efa,  mfe,  mpa, 
papa*  efa,  mfe,  mpa,  papix,  are  written  in  the  3If.  Gr.  ''effnr,  mfi, 
mj)a,  pappur,  efhur,  ?nfhi,  mpliiir,  papliur'\  and  in  the  four  last  words 
the  h  ought  to  have  an  n  subscribed,  both  together  only  to  denote 
the  nasalization  of  the  succeediryg  vowel.  In  the  etymological  and 
syntactical  parts  of  the  Mfantsi  Grammar  it  is  likewise  evident  that 
the  authors  were  under  the  disadvantage  of  being  not  acquainted  with 
the  great  variety  of  grammatical  phenomena  in  different  languages 
besides  the  English  and  their  own.  The  present  Grammar  contains 
references  to  the  Mf.  Gr.  in  several  places,  and  they  would  have  been 
increased,  if  it  had  not  been  for  want  of  space. 


PREFACE.  V 

'Die  autlior  lias  never  had  (lu!  advantage  of  living-  among  or  con- 
versing with  Englishmen  more  than  a  few  weeks  at  a  time,  neither 
could  he  submit  the  manuscript  or  part  of  it  to  an  Englishman  before 
it  went  to  the  jjress;  he  begs,  therefore,  to  excuse  for  any  deficiencies 
with  regard  to  the  English  diction,  technical  terms,  punctuation  and 
the  like.  He  is,  however,  indebted  to  a  brother  missionary,  the  Jlev. 
J.  Made,  joint  author  of  a  Tulu  Grammar  (Mangalore,  Basel  Mission 
Press,  1872),  who  had  been  15  years  in  the  East  Indies  and  happened 
to  take  his  abode  for  a  short  time  in  the  same  country-town,  for  his 
advice  and  corrections  and  the  communication  of  some  English  and 
East  Indian  Grammars,  the  arrangements  and  technical  terms  of  which 
contributed  to  the  features  of  the  present  book.  It  is  worth  noticing, 
that  Mr.  Made  was  sur])rised  to  find  many  analogies  in  the  ways  of 
expressing  man's  thoughts  in  the  African  and  Dravidian  languages. 

By  another  missionary  from  the  East  Indies  the  author  was  made 
acquainted  with  Th.  F render rjasVs  Mastery  System,  which  he  partly 
followed  in  initiating  a  newly  appointed  missionary  in  the  Tshi  lan- 
guage, and  which  led  him  to  hope  that  the  manner  in  which  examples 
are  given  in  this  Grammar,  will  prove  to  be  useful  for  more  than 
one  method  of  learning  the  language.  If  a  learner  should  not  be  in- 
clined to  follow  the  grammatical  arrangement  and  definitions  in  this 
Grammar,  he  may  pick  out  such  sentences  as  he  thinks  to  be  an- 
swering to  his  practical  purposes;  only  we  would  advice  every  foreign 
student  desiring  to  master  the  language,  to  have  the  sentences,  as 
far  as  possible,  read  or  spoken  to  him  by  Natives,  and  to  learn  with 
his  ear  and  tongue  not  less  than  with  his  eye.  It  remains  the  author's 
wish,  to  add  to  this  publication  not  only  a  shorter  Vernacular  Gram- 
mar, but  also  more  extensive  lists  of  words  and  collections  of  senten- 
ces and  well  arranged  proverbs  serving  as  a  ^Grammar  in  Examj)lcs\ 
besides  a  Tshi  Entjlisli  Didtonary.  For  a  satisfactory  preparation 
of  the  latter,  he  is  desirous  of  increasing  his  knowledge  of  the  Eante 
and  Asante  dialects,  either  personally,  or  by  any  contributions  in 
writing  that  may  be  obtainable  from  natives  educated  in  the  English 
and  German  Missionary  Schools  on  the  Gold  Coast. 

May  the  new  era  inaugurated  for  the  Gold  Coast  by  the  termination 
of  the  Asante  war  in  the  first  months  of  1874,  be  marked  by  a  steady 
progress  in  every  endeavour  and  undertaking  to  bring  the  long  neg- 
lected and  long  benighted  countries  of  the  Gold  Coast  under  the  in- 
fluences of  true  civilization  and  of  its  most  effective  agent,  the  light 
of  the  Gospel. 

Scliorndorf,    Wurtemberr/,  January  1875. 

J.  G.  GHRISTALLER. 


LISTS  OF  BOOKS  FOR  LITERARY  REFERENCES. 


A.  Authors  or  Publications  on  Geographical  and  Historical 
Matters  of  the  Gold  Coast. 

Information  on  the  state  and  history  of  the  Gold  Coast  since  the 
1 5th  century  may  be  drawn  from  the  following  sources: 

a.  Forkifiuesc  authors,  e.  g.   Vasconcclos  in  his  Life  of  King  John. 

h.  French^  JJutch  and  English  authors  of  the  17th  and  18th  centuries, 
who  had  been  on  the  Gold  Coast  in  or  about  the  years  put  in  paren- 
thesis, in  books  bearing  the  titles  of  a  Journcij  io  Guinea  or  a  De- 
scriplioH  of  Guinea;  viz.  Villault  de  Belief ond  (1066),  Barhot  (1680-87), 
Bosman  (1695-99;  his  book  was  printed  in  French,  Utrecht  1705), 
Th.Fhillips  (1694),  G.  Loijer  {^701),  J.  AtJcins  (1721),  des  Mar  chats 
(1725),  W.  Smith  (1726);  Arlus  of  l)anzi(j  (about  1600)  in  de  Bn/s 
East  Indies,  the  6th  part. 

C.   German  and  Banish  authors  of  the  17th,   IBth  and  19th  centuries: 

1.  MiUler,  W.J.  (1662-70  a  Danish  chaplain  at  Frederiksborg,  which 
fort  in  1 685  was  sold  to  the  English  and  named  Fort  Koyal,  now 
Fort  Victoria,  one  of  the  detached  forts  of  Cape  Coast  Castle).  His 
book  bears  the  title:  ^Die  Africanischc  Landscliaft  Fetu'  [Afutu], 
Hamburg,  1673  (a  counterfeited  edition  appeared  at  Niirnberg  1075), 
pages  287,   besides  a  vocabulary  of  about  500  words. 

2.  Tillemann,  E.  (a  Danish  lieutenant  at  Christiansborg  for  9  years), 
^Berelning  om  det  Landskah  Guinea  <f"c'.'  Kjobenhavn,  1697.  pp.  163. 

3.  Basic,  J.  (a  Danish  chaplain  in  Guinea,  1709-1712),  'Bcisehe- 
skrivelse  til  o/y  fra  Guinea',  Trondhjem,  1754.  pp.  320. 

4.  Romer,  L.  F.  (a  Danish  merchant  ab.  1735-1743),  'Efterretnimj 
om  Kysten  Guinea',  Kjobenhavn,  1760.  pp.  348.  (German  ed.  1769.) 

5.  Iscrl,  Dr.  F.  E.  (a  Danish  physician  general),  Beise  nach  Guinea 
(Ct.  (1783-1786),  Kopenhagen,  1788.  pp.  376.  (He  died  1789  on  the 
Danish  colony  Frederiksnopel  founded  by  him  on  the  Akuapem  moun- 
tains, near  Akropong.) 

6.  Monrad,  H.  C.  (a  Danish  chaplain  on  the  Gold  Coast  1805-1809); 
Gemdlde  der  Kiiste  ran  Guinea  etc.,  translated  from  the  Danish  into 
G(.'rman,  Weimar,  1824.  pp  388.  —  In  the  preface  on  page  XL  other 
Danish  sources  of  information  on  the  Gold  Coast  are  mentioned. 

7.  The  Missionaries  of  the  Moravians-,  who  died  on  the  Gold  Coast 
in  1736,  1768,  1709,  among  them  Ch.  Frotten  (see  hereafter,  B  2.). — 
Some  information  on  the  peoples  and  languages  of  the  Gold  Coast  is 
also  found  in  Oldendorp's  ^Geschichte  der  3Iission  der  evangelischen 
Briider  auf  den  hiseln  S.  Thomas,  S.  Croix  und  S.  Jan\  Bar  by,  1777. 


LISTS   OF   BOOKS.  VII 


8.  The  Basel  Missionaries,  in  their  reports  &c.  since  1828. 

A  good  deal  of  information  concerning  Asante  is  contained  in  the  uitercstiiig  book 
"  Vier  Jahre  in  Asante,  TcKjehuclicr  ilcr  Missionare  Eamscyer  und  Kiilmc  (nn 
der  Zeit  Hirer  Gcfangenschaft,  hcarhcitet  von  Dr.  H.  GundcrL",  Basel,  J  874, 
2d  ed.  1875.  This  book  has  been  translated  into  Enghsh  by  Mrs.  Weitbrcchl : 
"Four  Years  in  Ashantce  by  the  Missionaries  Uamseyer  and  Kiihne."  London, 
J.  Nisbet  &  Co.  1875. 

d.  English  authors  of  the  19th  century,  previous  to  the  war  of  tlie 
English  with  Asante  in  1873  and  74.    The  most  important  are 

1.  Boivdicli,  a  Mission  to  Asliantee;  London  1819;  reprinted  1874. 

2.  Beeclium,  Dr.  J.,  Asliantee  and  the  Gold  Coast,  London,  1841. 
(He  mentions  also  the  works  of  Meredith,  JJupuis,  Hidton,  &c.) 

3.  Cruickshank,  B.,  Eighteen  Years  on  the  Gold  Coast,  London,  1853. 

4.  The  Missionaries  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  JNIiss.  Soc.  since  1835. 
Compilations  on  the  state  and  history  of  the  G.  C.  are  also  found  in 

East,  1).  J.,  Western  Africa;  its  Condition  &c.  London,  1844,  and  in 
Wilson,  J.L.,  Western  Africa,  its  History  &c.  London  andNewYork,  1856. 

B.  Authors  furnishwuj  information  or  specimens  of  words 
of  the  Tshi  Language. 

1.  Midler,  W.  J.,  1670.    See  the  preceding  list,  A  6'  1. 

2.  Protten,  Ch.,  a  mulatto  of  Christiansborg,  studying  at  Copenhagen, 

about  1760.  En  nyttig  Grammaticalsh  Indlcdelse  til  Tvende  hidindtil 
gandsJce  uhekiendte  Sjjrog.  FanteisJc  og  Acraisk,  Kjobenhavu  1764. 
(A  useful  Grammatical  Introduction  into  two  hitherto  entirely  un- 
known Languages,  Fante  and  Akra,   Copenhagen  1764.  29  pages), 

3.  Eilham,  Hannah,  Specimens  of  African  Languages. 

4.  De  Graft,  W.,  Fanti  Vocabulary  in  Dr.  J.  Beecham's  'Ashantee  and 

the  Gold  Coast'. 

5.  Ansa,  John  Owusu,  and  W.  Oivusu  Ktvantabisa,  two  Asante  princes, 

1836-41   in  England. 

The  words  of  3-5  are  embodied  in  a  Vocabulary  of  a  few  of 
the  principal  languages  of  Western  and  Central  Africa,  compiled 
(by  the  African  Civilization  Society  with  the  assistance  of  Mr. 
Edwin  Norris,  Assist.  Seer,  to  the  Koyal  Asiatic  Soc.  of  London) 
for  the  use  of  the  Niger  Expedition,  London,  1841. 

6.  Clarke,  J.,  Specimens  of  Dialects,  short  Vocalmlaries  of  Languages, 

and  Notes  of  Countries  and  Customs  in  Africa,  Berwick-upon- 
Tweed,  1848. 

7.  Riis,  H.  N,  1849.    See  the  succeeding  list,  C.  5.  6.  4. 

8.  Kolle,  S.  W.,  Polyglotta  Africana,  Loudon,  1854. 

9.  Carr,  D.  L.,  and  Brown,  J.  P.,  Mfantsi  Grammar,  Cape  Coast,  1 868. 


VIII  LISTS    OK    IJUOKS. 


C  PuhUcations  in  the  Tsld  Language, 

prepared  hy  the  Basel  Missionaries  in  the  Akuajiem 

and  AJcem  Countries. 

The  figures  1 — 43  refer  to  the  order  in  which  the  siii.i;ie  pulilieations  follnwed 
each  otlier.  See  ".1  Dictionary,  KnyJiah,  Tnhi  (Ai>antr),  Alcr(i'\  jiajji;.  XVI— XX. 
where  tlio  titles  are  also  given  ui  Tshi,  and  the  names  of  the  traiisiators  of  tlie 
books  under  II.  III.  are  added.  Those  marked  *  arc  still  to  be  had  or  in  use,  the 
rest  are  out  of  print  or  replaced  by  new  editions. 

I.  Grammars  and  Vocahularies. 

*5.  Elemente  des  Ahivapim  Dialects  der  Odschi  Hjirache,  ontlialfeiul 
{^rarniiiatisclie  Grundziigc  iiiul  Wiirtersaninilung,  nebst  eiiicr 
Siiniiiilimg  voii  8pruchworteru  tier  Eiugeburncii,  von  11.  N.  liiis 
(pp.   18.  324).    Basel,  G.  Dctloff,  185;i 

*6.  (irammatical  Outline  and  Vocahulary  of  tJu:  Oji  LatKiwaje,  with 
especial  reference  to  tlie  Akwapim  Dialect,  togetlier  with  a  (J(tl- 
l(>,ction  of  Proverbs  of  the  Natives,  by  Eev.  11.  N.  liiis^  (pp.  S. 
276).  Basel,   C.  DctlofF,  1854. 

*41.  A  (xrammar  of  the  Asante  and  F ante  Lamjuaije  called  Tshi, — 
the  present  book. 

*39.  A  Dictionary,  English,  Tshi  (Asante),  Akra,  by  the  Rev.  J.  (1 . 
Christaller,  Rev.  Ch.  W.  Locher,  Rev.  J.  Zimmermann  (pp.  24. 
275).  Basel,   Missionsbucliliandlunj;-,   1874. 

II.   The  Bible  and  Fortions  of  it. 

*28.  The  Holy  Bible,  translated  .  .  .  into  the  Tshi  Languaj^e  .  .  . 

The  Old  Testament  (p.  783),  Basel,  1871,  bound  up  with 

*27.  The  New  Testament  (p.  255),  Basel,  187U. 

9.  The  Four  Gospels  (p.  285).   London,  1859. 

10.  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (p.  87).  Basel,  1859. 

18.  Genesis.    19.  Romans,  l-lll.  John,  Revelation.  Stuttgart,  IHGl. 

20.  1.  II.  Corinth.  Galat.  Ephes.  to  11.  Thessal.  Stuttgart,  1HG2. 

21.  1.  Timoth.  to  Jiide.  Stuttgart,   1803. 

*23.  The  Four  Gospels,  2d  ed.  (p.  27(;.)  15ascl,  1864. 
*26.  The  Fsalms  and  Proverbs  (p.  205.  70).  Basel,  1865. 

III.  Boohs  for  the  School,  Church  and  Family. 
1-4.   S])elling    and    Reading  Books    (pp.  3(!,    14,   159,48).  Based,    isl? 
1845.   1846.  1850. 
13.  Six  large  cards,   for  writing  and    reading.  Bas(d,    1859. 
12.   A  Primer,  together  with  a  Collection  of  Scrij)ture  Passages  (p.  68). 
Ba.sel,   1859. 

*31.  Primer  for  the  Vernacular  Schools  in  Aknapem,  Akem  .  . .  2d  ed. 
(p.  88).    Basel,   1872. 
7.  Dr.  Earth's  Bible  Stories  (p.  2.  192.,  with  wood-cuts).  Stuttgart, 
1855. 


LISTS   OF   BOOKS.  IX 


8.  Appf'iuliccs:  Corrections;  On  the  Orlhorirapliy  of  (he  Laiifiuafic; 
A  Prayer  read  in  Church;  A  Catechism  of  Christian  Doctrine 
(p.  12).  Stuttgart,  1857. 
*2').  Vr.  Earth's  Bible  Stories,  2fl  od.  (p.  2.  18G.  with  many  illustra- 
tions). Basel,  1871. 
^n.  (Arnold's)   Bible  Stories   for  Little  Children  (p.  75,   with  wood- 
cuts). Basel,  1862. 
10.  TJie  History  of  our  Lord's  Passion  (p.  31).  Stuttgart,  18(31. 

22.  A  Catechism  of  the  Christian  Doctrine,  and 

Select  Scripture  Passages  (p.  84).  Stuttgart,  1864. 
*3i{.    Words  for  Learning  and  Praijing,  —  containing 

I.  A  Catechism    of  the  Christian  Doctrine,    II.  Select  Scripture 
Passages,  III.  The  History  of  our  Lord's  Passion,  IV — VI.  Some 
Prayers  at  the  Sunday  Services,  for  Family  and  Private  Wor- 
ship, and  for  School-children  (p.  2.  175).   Basel,  1872. 
I'i.  A  IlymnJwoJc,  containing  19.'}  Hymns  (p.  328).  Stuttgart,  1850. 
*24.  IJtnr[ii/  and  Hymns  containing  I.  Common  Prayer,  Litany,  Order 
and  Manner  of  Baptism,   Contirmation  (with  a  Catechism,  called 
Confirmation-Book),  Administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  Solemni- 
zation of  Matrimony  and  the  Burial  of  the  Dead;  II.  236  Hymns 
in  the  Akuapem  dialect,  1 5  native  Faute  Songs  ;  p.  339).  Basel  1 865. 
25.  Statutes  and  Liturfjn  of  the  German  Evanfjeiical  Mission  Churches 
on  the  Cold  Coast  (Statutes,  p.  3-43;    the  rest  of  the  Liturgy, 
containing  different  Prayers  and  Thanksgivings  in  the  Church 
and    the  Order  of  Consecration  of  Catechists    or    Deacons    and 
Ministers  or  Priests,  p.  44-87).  B^asel,   1865. 
30.   Ucgulations  for  Catechists  (p.  18).  Basel,  1871. 
*34.  The  Doctrines  of  the  Christian  lielujion,  based  on  Dr.  Luther's 
smaller  Catechism,  by  J.  H.  Kurtz,  D.  D.,  translated  (with   an 
Appendix  on  the  Ecclesiastical  Year  and  Lists  of  Bible  Lessons; 
p.  4.  13.5).  Basel,  1872. 
1 4.  Tunehook  to  the  Otji  and  Akra  Hymnbooks  (p.  1 2. 48.).  Basel,  1 860. 
38.  Tunes  to  the  Tshi  and  Akra  Ilymnhooks,  supplementary  to  the 
Choralbook  for  Wirtemberg,   2d  ed.  (p.  16.76).  Basel,   1874. 
*32.  Instruction  in  Arithmetic,  (p.  3.  175).  Basel,  1872. 
42.  Examples  for  the  School-Arithmetic  in  Tshi  (the  printing  of  the 
manuscript  has  been  postponed). 
*15.  Tables  of  Ccneral  Histori/  (p.  24).  Stuttgart,   1861. 
*37.  Stories  from  General  History  (p.  11.  244).  Basel,  1874. 

IIL   Tracts. 

*40.  Man's  Heart,  either  God's  Temple  or  Satan's  Abode,  represented 

in  10  figures  (p.  55).  Basel,   1874. 
*35.   The  Orphan's  Letter  to  his  Saviour  in  Heaven  (p.  8).  Basel,  1873. 
*36.  Ofjuyomi,  the  Negro  Girl  at  Ibadan  (p.  16).  Basel,  1873. 
*43.  The  Spread  of  Christianity  i?i  Germany  (p.  56).  Basel,  1875. 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTES 

ON  THE  LANGUAGES  AND  DIALECTS  OF  THE  GOLD  COAST, 

their  Extent  and  Position  among  other  Languages. 


§  1.   The  Dialects  of  Tslii:  Akan  and  Fante. 
Enumeration  of  the  Countries  in  ivhich  they  are  spoken. 

The  principal  Language  of  the  Guhl  Coast  and  its  inhind  countries, 
of  which  a  Grammar  is  presented  in  this  book,  comprehends  hotli 
Akan  and  Fante  dialects.  Akan  is  chiefly  represented  by  Asante 
and  Akem,  and  in  purity,  extent  and  importance  prevails  so  much 
over  the  Fante  dialects,  that  we  might  even  use  this  name  as  the 
common  name  of  the  Language  instead  of  Tshi.  Before  discussing 
this  question  about  the  name  (in  §  3),  we  shall  enumerate  the  different 
countries  and  dialects  of  this  language,  in  five  groups,  beginning  at 
the  western  corner  of  the  Gold  Coast  and  proceding  to  the  east  and 
inland. 

A.  Akan  Dialects  are  spoken  in  the  western  part  of  the  Gold 
Coast  in  the  following  countries. 

1.  Asini,  Kwantiabo,  Anka,  Afuma,  see  §  6  B  1. 

2.  Amanahia  (Apollonia).,  from  the  lagoons  and  outlet.s  of  the  river 
Tandy  or  Tanno  to  the  Ankobra  Kiver. 

3.  Awini  (Awene,  Aowin),  to  the  north  of  Amanahia. 

4.  Ah  ant  a,  between  and  partly  beyond  the  rivers  Ankobra  and 
Pra.  On  the  coast  the  districts  of  Axim  &c.,  Akoda  and  Dixcove  or 
Mfunui  are  included;  Ahanta  itself  reaches  from  Busua  to  Secondee  or 
Sakiinne. 

'J'he  Akan  dialects  of  these  countries  do  not  seem  to  be  as  pure  as 
the  inland  dialects  to  the  north-east  of  them,  and  in  parts  of  Ahanta 
other  indigenous  dialects  seem  to  be  used  besides. 

5.  Was  a  (Wasaw),  along  the  northern  and  eastern  borders  of  Ahanta, 
extending  to  the  sea-coast  near  Sakunde,  and  reaching  as  far  as  Aka- 
taki  (British  Commenda).  The  Wasas  are  said  to  have  first  found 
gold  and  to  have  once  been  superior  to  the  Asautes;  they  belong  to 
the  Guaii  tribes  (cf.  §  5  A  1.  3.),   but  have  adopted  the  Akan  language. 

6.  Tshuforo  (Tshiforo,  Twiforo,  orig.  Kwiforo,  also  written  Juffer, 
Tilfel);  this  is  a  smaller  tribe  to  the  north-cast  of  Wasa,  speaking  a 
genuine  Akan  dialect. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTES.  XI 


7.  Dehkyera  (Daukara,  Denkera,  Dinkira  &c.),  was  a  once  j)0\ver- 
ful  tribo  to  the  north  of  Wasa  and  south-west  of  Asante.  'I'he  Asantes, 
first  subject  to  them,  subjugated  them  in  theii'  turn  about  the  year 
1719,  wlicn  Asante  became  the  most  powerful  nation  of  the  Gold  Coast 
countries.  Reduced  by  subsequent  wars  with  Asante,  the  Denkeras 
at  last  emigrated  and  settled  in  the  Fante  country  between  Wasa  and 
Abora,  having  for  their  capital  D  w  o  k  w  ii  ("Jiiquull,  about  12  miles 
north  of  Elniina,  taken   by  the  Asantes  in   187.'3). 

B.  'J'he  Fante  Dialects,  occupying  the  middle  part  of  the  Gold 
Coast,  80  to  100  miles  between  the  rivers  Pra  and  Sakumo,  and  ex- 
tending 20  to  25  miles  inland,  are  spoken  in  the  following  countries 
and  districts. 

1.  The  district  of  Komane  (the  formerly  Dutch  Commenda)  and 
Aguafo,  bonlering  on   Wasa  (A  5)  in  the  west  and  north-west. 

2.  The  town  of  Elmina  or  Dend  (Odenjl,   Edena). 

3.  The  Afutu  Country,  with   Cape  Coast  or  Gua  (Ogua,  Egua). 

4.  Fante  proper,  with  the  capitals  A  namahoe  or  Onomabo 
(Enomabow)    on  the  coast,    and  Mankesem,    a  few  miles  inland. — 

To  the  Fante  country  in  a  wider  sense  belong  Afutu  (No.  3)  and 
the  six  following  districts. 

5.  Abora,  to  the  north  of  Afutu  and  Fante  proper,  with  the  capital 
Abakrampa. 

6.  Agyimako,  to  the  north-east  of  No.  5. 

7.  Akomfi,  to  the  east  of  No.  4-6,  with  the  capital  Tiiam  (Tan- 
tum)  on  the  coast. 

8.  Gomoa  (Dwommoaj,  with  the  coast-town  Apam  or  ApA',  and 
the  capital  Gomoa  Asen,  on  the  Amankwade  hills  some  miles  inland. 

9.  The  Agona  Country's  south-eastern  part,  with  the  coast-towns 
Winnehah  or  Simpa,  Bereku,  Sanya  and  the  capital  Nsaba, 
20  miles  inland. 

10.  The  Agona  Country's  north-western  part  with  the  capital  Asf- 
kfima,  to  the  north-east  of  Nr.  6. 

On  the  Akra  country  and  language,  to  the  east  of  No.  9,  cf.  §  5  B. 
On  remnants  of  another  language  in  the  districts  No.  7-9,  cf.  §5  A. 

C.  Akan  Dialects  are  spoken  in  the  following  countries  of  the 
eastern  part  of  the  British  Protectorate  (as  it  was  formerly  called). 

1.  Asen,  lying  to  the  north  of  Abora  (B  5)  and  to  the  east  of 
Twiforo  (A  6).  One  half  of  this  tribe  formerly  dwelled  on  the  northern 
side  of  the  river  Pra,  but  when  they  threw  off  the  Asante  rule,  their 
country  to  the  north  of  the  Pra  was  left  to  lie  wa.ste,  and  the  river 
was  made  the  boundary. 

2,  Akem  Kotokii,  a  tribe  that  emigrated  trom  Asante  (after  1830) 
and  settled  within  the  territories  of  Abiiakwa  (Xo.  3).  The  capital  is 
Akem  Soaduru  in  Western  Akem,  bordering  on  an  Asante  province 
in  the  north  (Dadease?).    Formerly  part  of  this  tribe  was  settled  in  the 


XII  INTRODUCTORY   NOTES. 


nortli  of  Eastern  Akcni,  at  Gyadain,  between  Asiakwa  and  Tiognro, 
but  king  Agyeniau  left  tbat  town  and  neighbourhood  in  IHGO,  in  order 
to  terminate,  the  quarrels  with  Ata  II.,  the  king  of  Akem  Abiiakwa. 
Their  dialect  is  rather  Asante  than  Akem. 

3.  Akem  Ahuhkw n  (Eastern  AJccm).,  borders  on  Asikuma,  Agoiia 
and  Akuapcm  in  the  south.  The  king  dwells  at  Kyebi;  his  dukes 
are  the  chiefs  at  Akyease,  far  in  the  west  (perhaps  bordering  on 
Asen,  near  Soaduru  and  Asikuma)  and  at  Seuase  near  As  am  ah 
in  the  south,  at  Kukurantimi  in  the  east,  and  at  Asiakwa  and 
Begoro  in  the  north.  —  Akem  is  an  extensive  country,  but  thinly 
populated;  the  tribe,  once  powerful  and  rciuowned,  lias  been  much  re- 
duced by  former  wars  with  Asante  and  the  laziness  of  the  men.  Their 
dialect  is  considered  the  purest  and  nicest  Akan  dialect. 

4.  A  ku  a  pern,  on  the  Akuapem  mountains  from  Berekuso  (bordering 
on  Akra)  to  Krgbo,  and  in  the  broad  vale  along  their  northwestern 
side.  The  j)cople  are  of  a  threefold  origin:  a.  Indigenous  Akans, 
atAburi,  Afwerase,  Berekuso;  J).  Akans  from  Akem,  the  king  with 
(part  oi')  the  inhabitants  of  Akropong  and  Amannokrom;  c.  of  Guah 
descent  (cf.  §  5,  A  1):  aa.  Mampong,  in  the  midst  between  Aburi  and 
Akropong,  with  four  other  townships,  Tutu  and  Asantemma  (Ol)osom- 
ase)  on  the  Aburi  side,  Abotaki  and  Mamfe  on  the  Akropong  side ; 
hh.  two  Date  towns,  Ahenase  and  Kubease;  cc.  five  Kyerepong 
towns,  Abiriw,  Odawu,  Awukugua  with  Abonse,  Adukrom,  Apirede. 
The  towns  under  aa.  have  since  about  1750  entirely  exchanged  their  own 
language  with  Akan;  those  under  hh.  and  cc.  have  retained  their  own 
language,  besides  speaking  Akan.  —  When  Akuapem  goes  to  war, 
the  duke  of  Aburi  leads  the  van,  onci  party  of  the  Akropongs  under 
their  own  duke  forms  the  centre,  and  another  party  of  them  with  the 
king  is  in  the  rear;  the  Kyerepongs  under  tin;  duke  of  Adukrom 
form  the  right  wing,  and  the  remaining  7  townships  under  the  duke 
of  Date  form  the  left  wing.  —  A  similar  organisation  is  met  with  in 
other  Akan  and  Fante  countries,  so  that  in  every  one  the  king  has 
four  to  six  chiefs  of  the  principal  towns  as  his  dukes,  and  these  again 
have  the  chiefs  of  all  the  minor  towns  subordinate  to  them. 

5.  Akwam',  the  small  remnant  of  the  once  mighty  and  warlike 
Akwambu  nation,  now  occupying  the  banks  and  especially  the  eastern 
side  of  the  river  Volta  (or  Firaw)  from  Sehkye  to  Pese,  speaking  an 
indigenous  Akan  dialect. 

6.  K a,  man  a,  a  small  tribe  to  the  north-west  of,  and  belonging  to 
Akwam;  they  are  said  to  be  the  parent  tribe  of  the  Kwawu  peopb' 
(DILI.),  speaking  an  Akan  dialect  not  acknowledged  as  pure  and 
therefore  called  Apotokah. 

D.  Akan  Dialects  are  spoken  in  the  confederate  and  suhject 
provinces  of  the  Asante  hiwjdum,  as  it  existed  bf^fore  the  burning  of 
Kumase  by  the  English   in   1874. 

I.  'V\iQ.  confederate  provinces,  "whiiih  constitute  A  san  te  proper,  are 
the  following; 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTES.  XIII 


1.  Atwoma  (Atshoma,  named  from  tlio  red  clay  of  which  llie  soil 
consists),   with   the  capital  Kumase. 

2.  Sekyere,  with  the  capitals  Dwaben  (Juahen)  to  the  east,  and 
M  amp  on  to  the  north-east  of  Kumase. 

3.  Kokofii,  with  its  capital  having  the  same  name,  to  tiie  south-east. 

4.  Anianse,   with  the  capital  Bekwae,  to  the  south-west. 

5.  Kwabiri,   with  the  capital  Mamponten,  to  the  west. 

6.  Nsiita,  the  capital  having  the  same  name,  to  the  north. 

The  five  principal  towns  of  Asante  proper,  which  are  sometimes 
spoken  of  as  Akam-mane  nniim,  the  Five  Akan  States,  are  Okum- 
ase,  Odvvaben,  Kokofu,  Bekwae,  and  Omampon  or  Nsiita. 

(The  prefix  o-  in  three  of  these  and  in  other  names  is  usually  omitted.) 

To  these  provinces  of  Asante  proper  we  add 

7.  Adanse,  with  the  capital  Fomana,  to  the  south. 

II.  The  subject  provitices.,  called  Broiifo,  having  Asante  law  and 
Asante  rights,   are  the  following: 

1.  Kwawu,  including  Kwawu  Kodiabe  or  Asante  Akern, 
to  the  east  of  Asante  proper,   with  the  towns  Aguago,  Kodiabe,  Abctifi. 

2.  Burom,  capital  Takiman,  to  the  north-east,  extending  to  the 
Volta,   where  it  is  joined  by 

3.  Wo  r  a  wo  r  a,  to  the  east  of  that  river  (?). 

4.  Nkorjinsa  (which  is  also  the  name  of  the  capital),  to  the  N.  N.  E., 
a  seven  days'  journey  from  Kumase;  the  people  are  of  the  same  origin 
as  the  Asantes,   but  have  antique   forms    in   their   language. 

To  this  we  probably  have  to  join  the  two  following  provinces: 

5.  Kclrakye;  these  people  are  said  to  be  from  Date  (cf.  G  4  c'. />/>.) 
and  speak  their  own  language  besides  Tshi. 

6.  Ntvvumuru  (Ntshimuru),  of  which  the  name  already,  as  well 
as  the  language,  points  to  Tshi  origin.  — 

Turning  now  to  the  west,   we  find   mentioned : 

7.  Abesim,  to  the  N.  W.,  not  far  from  the  tributary  state  of  Gyamau. 

8.  Manosu,  to  the  west,  with  gold  mines. 

9.  Ahafo,  to  the  S.  W.,  with  extensive  forests,  from  which  divers 
kinds  of  venison  and  also  snails,    all   dried,  are  brought  to  Kumase. 

10.  Dade  as  e  is  mentioned  as  a  province  in  the  south;  perhaps  it 
belongs  to  Kokofu  (as  Sokore  in  the  oast  to  Dwaben?). 

11.  Safwi  (SaJllvi,  Sciivee),  to  the  S.  S.  W.,  about  u  week's  journey 
or  1 20  miles  from  Kumase,  bordering  on  Wasa  and  Awini  and  the 
countries  on  the  western  side  of  the  river  Tando,  may  rather  be  called 
tributary  than  subject  to  Asante. 

E.  Akan  Dialects  are  also  spoken  in  countries  to  the  north  of 
Asante,  either  tributai-y  to,  or  without  connection  with  Asante. 

1.  On  the  tributary  countries,  see  §2. 

2.  Trubi  is  said  by  J.  Clarke  to  be  a  country  "to  the  north  of 
Ashanti    and    near    to    Moshi    (cf.  §  2,)    among    the  Kong  mountains;" 


XIV  INTRODUCTORY   NOTES. 


or,  "beliiiul  Dahoitiy,  towards  Yoruba."  The  numerals  and  other 
specimens  of  tlie  language  given  by  Clarke  are  Akan,  but  a  few  Guan 
words  are  admixed,  from  which  we  may  infer,  that  Trubi  is  in  a 
similar  case  as  Karakye  (cf.  D  II.  5.),  if  not  identical  with,  or  belonging 
to  it. 

3.  Kyerehi,  with  the  towns  of  Bowuru,  Aposo,  Apafo,  B6r{\da, 
Totoromji,  and  many  others,  is  a  country  behind  Worawora,  to  the 
east  of  the  upper  Volta,  perhaps  far  to  the  north  of  Dahome,  not 
connected  with  Asante,  but  the   language  is  Akan.'^ 

§  2.  Couniries  and  Languages  to  the  North  of  Asante. 

Before    returning  to   the  Gold  Coast  Languages,    we   insert  names 

and  notices   of  other   countries  and  languages   in   the   steppe  to  the 

north  of  Asante.,  called  Serem  (Sarem),  or  beyond  it,  several  of  which 

countries,  partly  inhabited  by  Mohammedans,  were  tributary  to  Asante. 

1.  Gyaman  with  its  capital  Buntuku,  a  ten  days'  journey  to  the 
N.  N.  W.  of  Kumase,  beyond  the  river  Tanng,  bordering  on  Kono 
(Kong)  to  the  north,  with  gold  mines.  It  has  a  language  of  its  own, 
but  Akan  is  largely  understood  from  the  frerjuent  intercourse. 

2.  Ban  da  or  Banna  to  the  north  of  Kumase  and  north-west  of 
Nkonlnsii. 

3.  Nta,  a  popi;lous  country  with  the  great  market-town  Salagha 
or  Saraha,  perhaps  170,  or,  according  to  Soicdkh.,  250  miles  to  the 
north-east  of  Kumase,  a  good  day's  journey  from  the  other  side  of 
the  Volta.  Daboya  is  the  second  town  in  size.  The  numerals  of 
Nta,  as  given  by  Sowdich,  are  nearly  the  same  as  in  Tshi. 

4.  Aiiwa  or  Awohwa  and  Dagomba  or  Dagamma  (Sou'dirh: 
Yngwa,  Dagwumba),  with  the  large  town  of  Yende  (Yenne,  Yane, 
Yclni),  a  4  to  5  days'  journey  to  the  north-east  of  Salaga.  The  language 
is  similar  to  that  of  Mosi  (see  below  No.  5). 

Rem.  1.  The  inhabitants  of  No.  1.  3.  4.  are  Mohammedans,  at  least  in 
the  large  towns;  the  country  people  of  Dagamma  may  still  be  heathen. 
Gyaman,  Nta  and  Dagomba  are  said  by  Boicdich  to  have  been 
x*endered  tributary  by  Osei  Opoku  (1731-1742);  but  Gyaman  especially, 
afterwards  repeatedly  rose  in  war  against  Asante,  and  was  reported 
in  1866  as  having  become  independent.  In  Aiiwa  the  Mohammedans 
in  1873  (about  1  July)  treacherously  blew  up  with  gunpowder  several 
Asante  messengers.  —  Ban  da  is  recorded  as  having  been  engaged 
in  war  with  Asante  under  Osei  Akwasi  (1742-1752)  and  Osei  Kwame 


*Eice  is  the  chief  food  there;  iron  is  got  fi-om  the  ore  by  melting;  houses  are 
built  with  long  beams  of  the  odum  tree  fwhich  is  also  used  in  building  by  the 
missionaries  in  Akuapem).  —  A  young  man  that  had  been  brought  thence,  with  his 
hand  fastened  to  a  block  of  wood  for  tlu-ec  months,  till  he  arrived  and  was  sold 
as  slave  at  Akropong,  was  astonished  to  find  himself,  after  so  long  a  jom-ney,  among 
people  of  the  same  language.  The  writer  of  this  spoke  with  him  shortly  before  ho 
left  for  EurojJC  in  1858,  but  was  sorry  to  find  him  no  more  alive  when  he  had 
returned  to  Akropong. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTES.  XV 


(1781-1797)  and  as  having  been  destroyed  by  the  Moslem  king  of 
Ghofan  (?),   who  was  repulsed  by  the  Asantcs  between  1800  and  1807. 

lieyn.  2.  Nta  has  been  considered  by  some  as  the  place  of  origin 
of  all  Tshi  tribes;  but  the  Tshi  people  themselves  use  Otani,  pi.  Ntafo 
(in  contrast  with  Okanni,  Akanfo,  which  denote  the  pure  1'slii 
jjeople)  for  the  potofo  of  Serem  and  almost  equally  to  Odgiiko  or 
Odgnkoni,  plur.  Nnghkgfo,  from  Nngriko,  which  denotr^s  all  the 
nations  and  tribes  of  the  interior  not  speaking  Tshi,  many  of  whom 
are  Mohammedans. 

Of  tribes  in  Serem  and  neighbourhood,  an  informant  in  Kyebi 
(Akem,  1866)  named  the  following:  Pami,  Mfunare,  Nnoso,  Mpampa- 
ma(fo).  Others  add  as  'Ntafo  amah  (countries  of  the  Nta  peopteV 
Koho  (cf.  No.  1),  Kuri'isi,  Woromra  and  even  Nkoransa  (DIl,  4),  besides 
those  mentioned  under  No.  1 .  3.  4.  and  hereafter  under  No.  5  and  6. 

5.  Mo  SI  seems  to  be  a  large  country  to  the  north  of  Asante  and 
its  dependencies,  from  which,  either  by  wars,  or  by  caravans  coming 
to  Salaga,  many  slaves  are  brought  to  Asante.  On  the  language  see 
No.  4.  The  people  of  Mosi  and  Sana  are  said  to  be  heathen.  Other 
countries  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mosi  are:  Mozanze,  Bano,  Kiiluga 
(Heathens)  and  Yarega  (Mohammedans),  speaking  a  different  language; 
Gamara  (Moham.)  and  Gumma.  These  names  were  obtained,  in  1858, 
from  a  former  slave  from  Mozanze,  who  became  a  Christian  at  Akropong. 

6.  Mariwa,  Marawa,  Marowa  (Boivd.  Mallowa),  is  the  Tshi  name 
for  Hausa.  Hausa  slaves,  brought  by  caravans  to  the  market  at 
Salaga,  are  met  with  also  in  Akuapem ;  some  Hausas  fought  in  the 
Asante  war  (1874)  on  the  Asante  side,  whilst  others,  that  had  once 
been  slaves  in  Asante,  fought  under  the  English. 

;§  3.  Names  of  the  Lanpuage:  Tshi,  Amina,  Akan. 

1.  As  a  common  name  of  the  'Asante  and  Fante  Language'  we  have 
put  down  the  name  Tshi,  which,  however,  presents  difficulties  for  the 
pronunciation  and  writing  by  Europeans.  It  was  originally  Kwi  (or, 
with  a  prefix,  Ekwi,  Okwi);  the  'k'  was  changed  by  the  influence  of 
the  succeeding  'i'  (sounding  as  in  '■fiekV)  into  the  sound  of  ^cW  in 
' cheese' 1  yet  mitigated  by  the  'w'  blended  with  it.  Jlence  H.  N.  Uiis 
wrote  in  English  '0;V',  in  German  'Odschi',  but  within  the  language 
he  wrote  'Tyi',  which  (in  1869)  was  changed  into  'Twi';  instead 
of  rendering  this  in  English  by  'Chwee\  we  preferred  to  write  'Tshi', 
in  harmony  with  the  German  writing  'Tschi'. —  The  name  Tshi,  or 
Tvvi,  is  not  only  used  by  the  natives  themselves,  but  also  by  the  Akras 
and  the  tribes  to  the  east  of  the  Volta,  in  the  form  Otsui.  Kdivin 
Norris,  on  the  authority  of  W.A.Hanson,  noted  down  'Otsui'  as 
the  language  of  Ashanti  &c.* 


*The  prefix  of  Etwi,    as  name  of  the  language,    is    better  omitted. 
In  the  compounds  Otwini,  a  Tshi  man,  pi.  Atvvifo,  and  Otvvikasa,  Tshi 


XVI  INTRODUCTORY  NOTES. 


2.  Another  name  which  is  found  to  have  been  used  for  the  language 
in  question,  is  A  m  i  n  a.  Ch.  ProUen  in  the  preface  to  liis  Grammatical 
Introduction  into  Fante  and  Acra,  Copenhagen,  17G4,  calls  the  former 
repeatedly  the  'Fante  or  Amina  Language',  and  finally  resolves  to  use 
the  name  Fante,  only  on  account  of  its  being  known  to  the  Europeans. 
OUlendorj),  in  the  geographical  and  linguistic  information  gathered 
from  the  slaves  on  the  Danish  islands  of  S.  Thomas,  S.  Croix  and 
S.  Jan  (]7()7,  22  Mai,  to  1768,  23  Oct.),  uses  tlie  name  Amina  instead 
of  Asante  about  thirty  times;  only  once  the  name  Assenti  is  found. 
Cf.  the  list  given  above  on  pagi^  VJ,  A '.'  7. 

He  says:  "With  the  Fante,  Akkim,  Akkran,  Beremang,  Assein, 
Kisscru  (V),  Atti  (the  former  name  of  Abora  ?),  Okkau  and  Adansi, 
they  have  almost  continual  wars,  the  sole  cause  of  which  is  kidnapp- 
ing ..  .  One  tribe  of  the  Amina,  the  Quahu,  kills  many  elephants." 
(This  'Quahu'  and  the  above  'Okkau'  are  the  same  name  Okwawu, 
§  1  1)11  ].)  'J'lie  Akkran  (Akra,  Ga,  in  those  times  subject  to  Asante), 
are  said  to  belong  to,  and  the  'Fambi  (=  Adampe,  Adaiime),  to  border 
with  the  Amina  and  to  understand  their  language,  beside  speaking 
their  own  (cf  §  5  B). 

Clarke  also  knows  the  name  Amina,  but  places  it  "to  the  east  of 
Ashanti"  or  "near  to  Akim".  Under  'Fanti'  he  says:  "The  dialect  of 
Fante  is  called  Fetu,  or  the  Amina  Tongue".  —  To  revive  this  name 
Amina,  can,  however,    not  be  recommended. 

3.  The  FdiiU's  are  likely  to  object  to  the  adoption  of  the  generic 
nanu'  Twi  (or  Kwi,  as  they  would  say)  as  a  name  including  Fante, 
because  they  do  not  use  it  so,  and  likewise  to  the  name  Akan,  be- 
cause they  apply  it  only  to  the  inland  dialects  in  contradistinction  of 
the  'Fanti  or  Mfantsi  language',  as  they  call  their  own  dialects.  But 
Fante  and  Akan  cannot  be  considered  as  two  distinct  languages;  though 
both  of  them  be  subdivided  in  secondary  dialects,  they  are  only  bran- 
ches of  a  common  stem,  or  Akan  may  be  considered  ratlier  as  the 
main  trunc,  and  Fante  as  a  side  branch.  Whoever  likes  an  unmis- 
takable, easily  pronounced  name,  may  prefer  Akan,  comprising  within 
this  appellation,  the  Fante  class  of  dialects;  but  as  we  shrink  from 
introducing  changes  which  may  provoke  fresh  criticisms,  we  stick  to 
the  generic  appcdlation  of  the  Tshi  language. 


lanqucuie  (from  okasa,  langucuje),  the  prefix  is  'o',  but  ev(^n  this  ol'ten 
falls  off.  —  The  syllable  twi  is  also  found  in  the  names  Twuforo 
(foro  =  new)^  and  probably  Ntwumuru  (§1  AG;  D  11  C;  'i'  before  m,  f, 
becomes  'u');  in  Twidam  (Bowdicli:  TiJb/vcedavi,  Beechim:  Cliudan), 
the  name  of  one  of  the  original  families  of  the  nation;  in  etwi,  kuro- 
twiamansri,   names  of  the  leopard  &c. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTES.  XVII 


§  4.   The  Liierary  Dialent,  hased  on  the  Dialed  of  Akuapem, 
(IS  htiiuj  inlcrmcdkde  helwecn  the  Alcan  and  Fantc  Dialects. 

The  cliief  language  oi"  the  Gold  Coast  stands  not  only  in  want  of 
a  generic  name  universally  recognized;  the  (juestiou  irhich  dialect  is 
to  have  the  mastery  in  its  literature  too  is  to  be  solved. 

When  Sir  Grarnet  J.  Wolseley  addressed  his  summons  from  Cape 
Coast,  Oct.  IStli,  IHT^:;,  to  tlie  king  of  Asante,  it  was  at  first  intended 
to  have  the  letter  sent  in  Asunte  and  English;  but  then  only  it  was 
discovered  "that  no  proper  written  representation  of  the  Fante  or 
Asante  dialect  existed."  'J'his  prevented  the  dispatch  of  the  summons 
for  nearly  a  foi'tnight.  But  a  real  transliteration  of  the  Tshi  language 
had  for  some  time  been  in  existence,  which,  though  not  immediately 
based  on  the  Asante  or  any  Fante  dialect,  would  perfectly  have  an- 
swered the  requirements  of  the  case.  We  mean  the  transliteration  of 
the  Akuapem  dialect,  which  will  be  the  most  eligible  ibundation  for 
a  Tshi  literature,  though  as  yet  hardly  known,  much  less  tried,  by 
the  educated  Fantos  who  were  hitherto  accustomed  only  to  English 
books  and  orthography.  'Jhe  orthography  ingrafted  on  the  English 
language  in  the  course  of  its  historical  development,  but  inconsistent 
in  itself  and  with  the  actual  pronunciation,  and  defective  as  that  of 
no  other  literate  language,  cannot  be  made  the  foundation  for  reducing 
a  hitherto  unwritten  language  to  writing,  as  has  been  tried  in  the 
Mfantsi  Grammar  hy  I).  L.  Carr  and  J.  P.  Broivn,  Cape  Coast,  1868, 
by  which  the  authors  thought  to  "confer  upon  the  Nation  the  rights 
of  having  its  language  added  to  the  catalogue  of  written  languages." 

Rem,  The  said  publication  and  its  orthography,  compared  with  the 
system  of  sounds  as  represented  in  this  grammar,  may  well  serve  as 
an  illustration,  that  in  writing  Tshi,  be  it  called  Fante  or  Akan,  we 
can  confine  oiirselves  neither  to  the  fundamental  principles  of  English 
orthography,  nor  to  the  number  of  letters  of  the  English  or  Konian 
Alphabet,  nor  to  the  ^lissionary  Alphabet  proposed  by  I'rof.  Max 
Midler,  in  which  Italics  are  employed  to  express  additional  sounds: 
but  that  we  must  resort  either  to  additional  letters  or  to  diacritical 
signs  added  to  the  Roman  letters;  and  in  this  we  could  certainly  not 
have  done  anything  better  than  adopt  Lepsius'  Standard  Alphabet., 
which  is  so  widely  employed  for  African  languages  that  it  may  be 
considered  as  the  graphic  system  essential  to  them.  That  printing 
offices  must  have  an  additional  set  of  letters  besides  those  used  in 
English,  is  an  unavoidable  consequence;  but  the  diacritical  marks  are 
neither  so   copious,  nor  so  troublesome,  as  those  of  Arabic  writing. 

With  regard  to  the  question,  irhich  of  the  exisliny  Tshi  dialects  is 
to  be  chosen  for  literary  purposes,  we  submit  the  following  remarks. 


J 


XVIII  INTRODUCTORY   NOTES. 

It  would  certainly  be  desirable  from  a  scientific  point  of  view,  that 
more  than  one  dialect  be  thoroughly  inv(^stii!:ated  and  truly  represented, 
yea  even  that  different  dialects  be  cultivated  and  the  folklore  of  each 
rprovcrbs,  songs,  popular  and  historical  tales  &c.)  diligently  collected 
by  different  writers,  as  in  ancient  Greece  the  Ionic,  Aeolic,  Doric  and 
Attic  dialects  did  co-exist.  But  as  these  different  dialects  in  process 
of  time  gave  way  to  a  Common  Dialect,  so  the  tribes  of  the  Gold  Coast 
stand  in  need  of  a  common  book-language,  if  the  matter  be  considered 
from  a  practical  point  of  view,  'ilie  Akan  and  Fante  dialects  do  not 
differ  so  much  as  those  ancient  Greek  or  as  the  different  English  and 
German  dialects,  neither  are  they  spoken  by  as  many  individuals. 
And  when  more  than  forty  millions  of  Germans  enjoy  a  common  book- 
language,  half  a  million  of  Fantes  may  more  easily  be  brought  to 
unite  with  three  millions  of  Akans  in  the  use  of  a  common  Bible  and 
a  common  medium  of  communication  by   writing. 

The  dialects  of  Fante,  compared  with  those  of  Akem  and  Asante, 
are  indeed  deteriorated  dialects  of  the  same  language,  less  clear  and 
distinct  than  they,  and,  according  to  concurring  testimonies  of  ancient 
and  recent  dates,  less  agreeable  to  the  ear.  Another  point  is,  that  within 
the  Fante  dialects  there  are  differences  greater  than  those  obtaining  be- 
tween Asante,  Akem  and  Akuapem;  e.  g.  the  word  ase,  under ^  occurs 
in  the  tbree  forms  ade,  adze,  ase,  whilst  As.  and  Aky.  have  ase 
and  asee,  and  Akuap.  only  ase;   cf.  §  293,  15.  J2e)^.  i.  ^. 

The  writers  of  the  'Mfantsi  Qrmnmar'  admit  the  correctness  of  the 
statement  of  11.  N.  Rus^  that  the  difference  between  the  Akan  and 
Fante  dialects  is  not  so  great  as  to  prevent  a  Fanteman  conversing 
without  difficulty  with  an  inhabitant  of  Asante  or  Akuapem,  and  vice 
versa^  and  add:  "There  is  even  in  the  Mfantsi  language  so  many  a 
borrowed  word  or  expression  from  the  Akan  language,  that  the  purity 
of  the  former  language  must  have  been  rendered  questionable,  or  the 
latter  may  claim  to  be  pointed  to  as  having  the  radical  key  of  the 
two  tongues."  (Preface  pag.  6.  7.)  Again,  on  the  second  point,  viz.  the 
differences  among  tlie  Fante  dialects,  the  same  authors  say  (Pref.  p.  13.) : 
"The  Kingdoms  of  Gomua,  Enumabu  and  Abura,  in  oratorical  skir- 
mishes, may  contest  the  point  of  a  Metropolitan  standard  for  the  Mfantsi 
language;  but  the  drawn  sword  of  Provincialism,  by  which  the  Dialect 
of  one  District  is  bounded  on  each  side  by  the  Dialects  of  other 
Districts,  can  only  have  to  be  sheathed  back  again  to  rest  i  n  the 
mutual  retreat  of  the  bearers.  We  may  as  well  fix  our  speech  to  the 
idioms  of  Igua,  (^that  is.  Cape  Coast,)  seeing  that  the  Orthography  of 
one  District  may  be  taken  as  a  criterion  for  all  the  others."  These 
words  point  as  well  to  the  diversity  as  to  the  jealousy  obtaining 
among  those  Fante  dialects,  whilst  the  Akan  dialects,  though  spoken 
on  territories  of  much  greater  extent  and  of  tribes  that  were  for  a 
h)ng  time  hostih;  to  (!ach  other,  are  l(>ss  inclined  to  divergencies,  and 
belter    agree   with  each  other. 


INTRODUCTORY    NOTES.  XfX 


We  grant  to  every  existing  dialect  its  right  of  existence,  and  are 
glad  of  every  faithful  representation  on  paper  of  any  dialect  or  speci- 
men of  such,  like  the  cjuoted  Mfantsi  Grammar,  though  the  orthography 
adopted  in  it  must  be  considered  as  a  failure  for  practical  purposes. 
But  it  seems  to  us,  that  neither  the  dialect  of  Cape  Coasts  nor  any 
other  Fante  dialect,  not  even  tlie  purest  of  them,  that  of  Anamahoe, 
is  fit  to  form  the  base  of  a  literary  language  for  the  Akan  and  Fantc 
tribes.  Ought  we,  then,  not  to  take  the  Asante  dialect  or  the  Alccm 
dialect  for  this  purpose?  The  choice  is  made  already,  enforced,  indeed, 
by  casual  events  and  circumstances,  but  which,  after  all,  have  some- 
thing providential,  —  and  will,  for  a  considerable  time,  prove  to  be 
the  best  that  could  have  been  made.  It  is  the  dialect  of  Alcaapem 
that  has  actually  been  made  the  base  of  a  common  dialect;  a  literary 
language  has  been  created,  and  such  a  common  dialect  is  now  existing 
in  the  Bible  and  dozens  of  other  printed  books,  as  well  as  manuscripts 
and  letters  of  many  individuals  since  more  than  two  decenniums. 
What  are  the  merits  of  this  dialect?  It  is  an  Alcan  dialect  influenced 
hi/  Fante,  steering  a  middle  course  between  other  Akan  dialects  and 
Fante,  in  sounds,  forms  and  expressions;  it  admits  peculiarities  of  both 
branches  as  far  as  they  do  not  contradict  each  other,  and  is,  therefore, 
best  capable  of  being  enriched  from  both  sides.  H.  N.  liiis  has  truly 
remarked,  that,  if  the  language  should  receive  literary  cultivation,  the 
diflferences  of  the  dialects  will  be  no  impediment  to  its  development, 
but  they  will  be  subservient  rather  to  its  enrichment.  This  is  actually 
the  case.  The  native  missionary  David  Asante,  who  took  and  still 
takes  a  considerable  share  in  the  literary  cultivation  of  the  Tshi 
language  and  its  development,  remarks  in  a  letter  of  Sept.  1874,  that 
'the  Akuapems  are  accustomed  to  embellish  tlieir  spoken  dialect  by 
blending  it  with  Akem  expressions,  that  Akuapem  easily  admits  of 
enrichment  and  admixture  from  Akem  and  even  Fante,  and  Fante 
also  admits  and  receives  such  foreign  elements;  but  if  the  same  should 
be  done  in  the  Akem  dialect,  it  would  not  sound   well'. 

Cf.  what  is  said  of  the  Akuapem  dialect  in  ^A  Dictionary,  Fnfjlish, 
TsJii  (Asante),  Akra';  Basel,  1874,  pag.  IX-XI. 

On  the  nature  of  the  differences  between  the  Akem,  Akuapem  and 
Fante  dialects,   we  refer  to  the  Appendix  III.  on  the  Dialects. 

Should  however  a  Homer  arise  in  any  of  the  other  dialects,  the 
Tshi  tribes  may  all  be  brought  to  bow  to  him  and  acknowledge  the 
superiority  of  his  diction ;  in  the  mean  time  it  seems  the  most  rational 
way  to  build  on  the  foundation  laid,  not  by  any  transcendent  inspi- 
ration, but  by  the  conscientious  and  painful  labour  of  those  who  first 
succeeded  in  writing  the  language  and  teaching  thousands  of  Africans 
to  use  it  in  literary  intercourse. 


XX  INTRODUOTOKY    NOTES. 


^'  5.   Oilier  Latifiuaffcs  spoken  in  llis  Gold  Coast  Cuimlries. 

Oilier  L(iii(iu(i!i€S  s])oken  tcil/i/'n  lite  territories  of  the  (Hold  Const, 
besides  'J'slii,  arc  A.  the  Guan  language,  and  dialects  or  languages 
similarly  circumstanced,  and  B.  the  Akra  or  Ga  language  and  kin- 
dred dialects. 

A.  Of  a  language  and  its  dialects,  (»r  of  distinct  languages  which 
in  former  times  seem  to  have  been  extensively  spoken  throughout  the 
Gold  Coast  countries,  but  were  in  most  places  supjjlanted  and  super- 
seded by  the  language  of  the  ascending  I'shi  tribes,  the  following 
remnants  and  vestiges  are  to  be  mentioned. 

1.  'J'he  Guah   language  is  still   used 

a.  In  Akuapcm:  au.  in  the.  two  towns  of  Date  (G;t:  Late,  Guah: 
Lcte)  and  hh.  in  the  five  Kyerepong  towns,  a  by-name  of  which, 
Am  annuo  niira,  is  interpreted,  "amai'i  aduonum,  fifti/  toivns"'.,  —  so 
many  they  are  said  once  to  have  been -;  but  perhaps  tluMnterpreta- 
tion  "amannua-anum,  /Ive  hrother-toirns'^  is  also  possible.  (In  the  five 
towns  between  Akropong  and  Al)uri,  mentioned  in  §1  C  4  t',  rta,  that 
language  has  been   given  up  entirel}.) 

h.  Tn  Anum,  beyond  the  Volta,  to  the  north-eastward  of  Akwam. 
This  dialect  is  not  much   different  from  that  of  Date  and  Kyerepong. 

The  formation  of  nouns  and  their  plural,  in  Guah,  and  the  inflexion 
of  the  verb,  agree  much  with  those  in  Tshi ;  among  the  sounds  used 
in  the  language  we  find  the  kp,  gb,  hm  and  1  of  the  Akra  language; 
the  stock  of  words  is  partly  different  from  Tshi  as  well  as  Akra, 
partly  borrowed  from  these  two  neighbouring  languages,  especially  from 
'J'shi.    There  are  scarcely  any  points  of  special  contact  with  the  Ewe. 

c.  In  Karakye  the  same  language  is  said  to  exist  as  in  Date,  the 
people  being  of  Date  descent;  but  as  they  have  been  separated  from 
each  other  for  a  long  time,  their  dialects  will  now  probably  differ.  — 
In   Trubi  (§  1  E  2)  we  have  likewise  found  vestiges  of  a  Guah  dialect. 

2.  The  Obutu  language  is  found,  as  we  are  informed,  in  the  follow- 
ing coast-towns  of  Agona,  Gomoa  and  Akomf'i  (§  1  V>  9.  8.  7.):  Sany  a, 
Afutu  Bercku,  Simpa  (Winnehah),  Apft,  and  jjrobably  Dago  or 
Lagu,   Elegu,  near  Tii^m  to  the  east-ward. 

3.  Whether  the  dialect  or  language  is  the  same  in  the  towns  men- 
tioned under  No.  2,  and  in  what  relation  Obutu  stanils  to  Guah, 
and  likewise,  whether  the  former  language  of  the  Was  as  (§  1  A  5) 
was  really  Guah,  we  are  as  yet  unable  to  tell.  The  dialects  that  are 
spoken  in  the  A  bant  a  country  besides  the  Akau  language  (§  1  A  4) 
are  likewise  unknown  to  us. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTES.  XXI 


B.  TIhi  soutli-castcrii  corner  of  the  Gold  Coast  is  occtntici]  l)y  tlic 
Akra  or  Ga  language. 

1.  'J'he  dialect  of  Go.  proper,  in  wliicli  the  Bible  and  many  otli(;r 
books  arc  printed,  begins  already  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  Agona 
country,  the  coast-town  of  Nyenyano  being  half  Fante,  half  Akra, 
and  is  spoken  by  about  40,000  people  in  the  coast-towns  Ga  and 
Kink  a  or  BriUsli,  and  Dutch  Akra  (in  Tshi:  Nkran  and  Kaiikah), 
Osu  (Clirislianshori}),  La  (or  Dade),  Tcsi  and  Nunvva  (Ningua), 
and  in  the  numerous  inland  villages  belonging  to  them  and  extending 
to  the  borders  of  Akem  and  Akuapem.  —  A  branch  of  the  Ga  dialect 
is  spoken  at  Popo  and  Whidah  by  people  whose  ancestors  emigrated 
from  Akra,  when  the  Akwambus  conquered  and  destroyed  their  towns 
in   1680,   as  far  as  they  have  not  adopted  the  language  of  Whidah. 

2.  Adanme  dialects  of  the  Akra  language  are  spoken  by  about 
80,000  people  a.  in  the  coast  towns  Tenui,  K.pong  (Foni),  Gbu- 
gbra  (Kpukprji,  I'rampram),  Nurio  (Nm<jo)  and  their  inland  villages; 
h.  at  Ada  (from  which  the  name  Adanme  =  Adagbe,  Ada  language) ; 
c.  on  the  Sai  (Siade)  and  Osudoku  mountains;  d.  at  Asadsale  (Asu- 
twaree)  and  Kpong  on  the  Volta;  e.  in  the  Kro  or  Krobo  country. 
A  branch  of  the  Adanme  dialect  is  also  spoken  by  the  Agotime 
tribe  to  the  east  of  the  Volta,  between  the  Avveno  and  Adaglu  tribes 
of  the  Ewe  (Ef/)e)  nation,   with  three  principal  towns. 

The  dialect  of  Krobo  is  the  oldest,  that  of  Ga  the  youngest  dialect; 
Ihe  latter  has  largely  borrowed  from  Akuapem  and  Eante. 

^'  6.  Neighbour  inn  Languages. 
Languages  spoken   on    the  hurders  or  i)i  the  ncighho'urh.ood  of  the 
terrilories  of  the  Gold  Coast,  besides  those  in  the  interior  to  the  north 
of  Asante,  mentioned  in  §2,   are  the  following: 

A.  Jn  the  East  of  tlie  Gold  Coast  territories  the  Ewe  (Eg^e)  language 
is  sjjoken  in  9  towns  on  the  western  banks  of  the  Volta  between  Ada 
and  Asutsare,  and  in  tlu^  countries  to  the  east  of  that  river,  by  tlie 
tribes  of  A  nlo  (Anwona,  ^MW/Z^f^^,  Aweno,  Adaglu,  Ho,  and  many 
others.  (For  the  countries  to  the  east  of  the  lower  Volta,  the  name 
Krcpe  is  used  by  the  Europeans.)  Dialects  of  the  same  language 
are  spoken  in  Dahome  and  almost  the  whole  territory  between  the 
Volta  and  the  countries  of  the  Yoruba  language.  Ewe  is  a  language 
akin  to  'J'slii  (cf.  §  7  A  I^  2  and  C),  but  not  in  close  affinity;  we  find 
in  it  several  words  and  proper  names,  especially  those  denoting  the 
week-day  of  the  birth  of  a  child,  borrowed  from  Tshi. 

B.  In  the  West  of  ihe  Gold  Coast  territories  we  find  closer  affinities 
with  Tshi,  than  in  the  east. 


XXII  INTKODUCTORY   NOTES. 


1.  The  Asini  or  Atakla  counti-y,  capital  X^m/u&O  or  Kwautiabo, 

and  the  inland  countries  Anka    and  Afuma,    on    both    sides   of  llie 

river  Tandg  or  Tanng,  (which  is  one  of  the  fetishes  of  the  Tshi  nation). 

From  the  geographical  names   we  may  conclude  that  the  language  ot 

these  countries  has  at  least  affinities   with  Tshi. 

Cr.  Loifcr  0701)  gives  a  prayer  of  the  natives  at  Asini,  containing  23  words,  of 
wliic'h  IS  or  21)  are  pure  Tsui.  But  most  of  other  names  of  persons  &c.  are  not 
Tshi.  Lover  s])eaks,  however,  of  three  diflerent  trihes  in  Asini,  and  their  wars  and 
migrations  in  1(JU0  and  1670. 

2.  On  the  Ivory  Coast  we  meet  with  several  names  as  mentioned 
in  the  'African  Pilot'  vol.  I  pag.  130-132.,  which  contain  unmistakably 
Tshi  words ;  e.  g.  Brooni  Mock,  Ensou  Point,  Ahrapa,  Enframa  Point, 
Drcivin  Ehhimsa  (buroni,  ivliite  man,  nsu,  ivater,  mframa,  wind,  abiesa, 
three);  the  said  names  may,  however,  have  been  furnished  by  natives 
of  the  Gold  Coast  on  European  ships. 

3.  Avikum,  is,  according  to  Clarke,  the  name  of  the  people  at 
Grand  Cape  LaliOU,  Ivory  Coast.  The  names  of  ten  tribes  dwelling 
thei'cabout,  and  of  others  farther  inland  to  the  source  of  the  Joliba 
or  Niger,  have  partly  prefixes,  and  are,  therefore,  in  affinity  rather 
with  the  'J'shi,  than  with  the  Kru  language  spoken  about  Cape  Pal- 
mas  and  on  the  Grain  or  Liberia  Coast;  six  of  the  Avikum  numerals 
i'rom  1   to  1 0,  given  by  Clarke,  to  some  degree  resemble  those  in  Tshi. 

^'  7.  The  Position  of  Tshi  amom)  the  African  Languages. 

As  to  the  posiiion  which  the  Tshi  language  liolds  among  the  African 
languages  in  general,  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  belongs  to  that  great 
stock  of  languages  which  have  been  termed  Prefix-prononiinal  Lan- 
guages, the  principal  characteristic  of  which  is  the  employment  of 
prefixes  in  the  formation,  classification  and  pluralization  of  nouns  and 
in   representing  them  (before  other  parts  of  speech). 

A.  These  Prefix-pronominal  Languages,  according  to  Dr.  W.  IL  I. 
Pleek*,  include  the  Ba-ntu,  Mena   and  (ror  families. 

I.  The  Bantu  Fajnily  has  two  divisions,  a.  the  South-African  and 
h.  the  West-African. 

a.  Tlie  South-African  Division  extends  over  the  continent  south  of 
the  equator,  only  the  languages  of  the  Hottentots,  Bushmen  and  II- 
oigob  being  excepted,  and  some  degrees  to  the  north  of  it,  on  the 
west  coast  to  the  Cameroons  and  Komby  mountains,  including  the 
island  of  Fernando  Po.    It  has  several   branches  and  subdivisions. 


*Cf.  Handhook   of  African  &c.  Philology,   as  repn-sented  in  the.  Library  of  Sir 
(t.  Grey,  vol.  1.  pai-t  1.  2.,  by  Dr.  W.  H.  I.  Bieek.  London,  Triibner  &  Co. 


INTRODUCTORY    NOTES.  XXTII 

/;.  The  West-African  Division  has  three  branches:  1.  the  Nirjcr 
branch,  comprising-  the  Etili.,  Ibo,  Nuti,  Yoruba  &c.  2.  the  Volta  Jiramh, 
comprising  the  Ewe  (Ecpa)  or  Dahome,  and  the  Tshi  and  Guaii ;  3.  tlie 
Sierra  Leone  Branch,  comprising  the  Tomne,  BuHom,  Sherbro.  The 
hmguages  of  the  Niger  and  Volta  branches  have  the  prefixes  no  more 
to  the  same  extent  as  the  South-African  division  and  the  Sierra  Leone 
branch,  and  the  diflterences  between  the  single  languages  reckoned  to 
the  same  branch  are  greater.  Whilst  the  Efik  has  preserved  a  good 
number  of  prefixes  and  the  pluralization  by  prefixes  (though  the  latter 
is  already  much  neglected),  the  Yoruba  has  less  formative  prefixes  and 
has  altogether  lost  the  formation  of  the  plural  by  prefixes.  The  E\Ve 
has  only  two  prefixes  left,  consisting  of  the  vowels  'a'  and  'e'  (of 
which  'a'  sometimes,  and  'e'  usually,  falls  off  when  the  noun  joins  a 
pi'eceding  word),  and  forms  the  plural  of  nouns  by  a  suffix;  but  in 
Tshi  the  prefixes  are  again  used  for  classification  and  pluralization; 
only  to  a  very  limited  degree  suffixes  are  employed  in  forming  the  plural. 

II.  Whether  the  A  k  r  a  language  (§  5  B)  is  indeed  to  be  separated 
from  the  Ba-ntu  and  classed  with  the  '6ror  Family'  (to  which  Dr.  Uleelc 
also  reckons  the  Tula  and  Wolof  and  the  Fumale  language),  may  be 
questioned,  as  the  existence  of  prefixes  and  the  formation  of  the  plural 
are  found  in  it  as  in  the  Ewe,  and  many  other  features  as  in  Ewe 
and  Tshi. 

III.  The  K  r  u  language,  of  which  the  Gedebo  (Grebo)  and  Basa 
are  dialects  and  which  Dr.  BleeJc  mentions  under  the  'Wlena  Family', 
has  no  formative  prefixes  at  all,  and  the  plural  is  formed  by  changes 
in   the  termination  of  nouns. 

B.  The  rest  of  the  African  languages  belong  to  the  so-called  Suffix- 
pronominal  LamjiuKjes. 

I.  To  the  Sex-denoting  Family  of  them  belong  in  South  Africa  the 
languages  of  the  Hottentots  and  Bushmen,  in  North  Africa  (as  the 
Semitic  Branch)  the  Hausa  and  Temashirt  (Berber),  the  Galla,  Daukali, 
Somali,  Harari,  the  Amharic  and  Arabic,  and,  besides,  the  Jl-oigob 
language. 

II.  To  these  Suffix-pronominal  languages  are  added  the  Mandc-Teda 
lanfjaages;  e.  g.  in  North  Africa  the  Bornu  (Kanuri)  and  Teda,  in 
West  Africa  the  Mande,  Bambara,  Soso  and  Vai  languages. 

C.  As  far  as  we  can  see,  the  Yoruba,  Ewe  and  Tshi  have  several 
features  in  rommon  with  the  Mande  and  Kru  languages  rather  than 
with  the  Southern  division  and  the  Sierra  Leonid  branch  of  the  Ba-ntu 
languages;  e.  g.  in  the  verb  the  monosi/llahic  form  of  the  stew  prevails 
(in    Yoruba  even   more  than  in  Tshi),   and  the  conjugation  or  inflr  rion 


XXIV  INTRODUCTORY    NOTES. 


of  the  verh  floes  not  presont  the  same  variety  of  forms;  especially  the 
passive  form  is  wanting  (though  not  altogether  in  Kru).  In  Yoruba 
and  Efik  tlie  noiui  or  pronoun  in  the  j^ossessive  case  stands  (tftcr  the 
noun  to  which  it  refers,  as  in  the  South-African  and  Sierra  Leone 
languages;  in  Evve  this  is  no  more  the  case,  except  with  the  possessive 
pronoun  of  the  1st  and  2d  pers.  sing.,  which  may  he  used  before  or 
<i.fter  the  noun  to  which  they  belong;  but  in  Tshi,  Akra,  Kru,  Maude, 
the  genitive  word  always  precedes  the  noun  to  which  it  refers  (the 
Bambara  in  this  respect  making  an  exception  among  the  Mande  lan- 
guages). The  way  in  which  the  prepositions  of  European  languages 
are  expressed  by  verhs  and  nouns,  seems  to  be  essentially  the  same 
in  the  Niger  and  Volta  branches  of  the  Ba-ntu  languages  and  in  the 
Kru  and  Mande  languages.  Such  and  other  particulars  of  the  laniily 
relations  of  the  Tshi  with  other  languages,  however,  would  find  their 
place  in  a  comparative  Grammar  on  African  languages  rather  than  in 
this  introdiiction,  and  cannot,  therefore,  here  be  entered  into  at  length. 
But  it  is  hoped  that  the  present  Grammar  will  furnish  materials  and 
inducements  to  the  proseciition  of  the  labours  of  comparative  philology, 
by  which  the  peculiarities  of  the  single  languages  will  be  gradually 
cleared  up  and  the  mastering  of  such  languages  will  in  consequence 
be   nu)re  and   more  facilitated  to  Euroj)eans. 


A  GRAMMAR 

OF  THE 

ASANTE  AND  FANTE  LANGUAGE 

CALLED  T8HI    [CHWEE,   TWI]. 


PART  I. 

OF  SOUNDS  AND  LETTERS   (PHONOLOGY). 


CHAPTER  I. 
Pronunciation  and  Division  of  Sounds. 

ALPHABET. 

1.  In  accordance  with  the  ^Standard  Alphabet  for  reducing  unwrit- 
ten laiiguayes  dc.  to  a  umform  orthography  in  European  letters  '*>, 
which  has  been  widely  employed  for  African  languages,  we  make  use 
of  the  following  letters : 

a  (si)  b  d  e  e  (e)  f  g  h  i  k  (1)   m  n  n  0  0  (o)  p  r  s  t  u   w   \V  y. 

Remarks.  1.  These  27  letters  represent  as  many  simple  sounds. 
Additienal  sounds  are  :  the  nasal  vowels,  §  3,  the  sound  of  m  before  f, 
the  palatal  n,  §  8,  the  sound  of  hy,  §  10,  and  the  compound  sounds 
of  t\v,  dw,  fw,  §  12.   On  1  and  some  other  foreign  letters,  see  §  8.  14. 

2.  The  letters  ;>  e  o  are  only  used  for  exact  grammatical  distinction  ; 
in  common  writing  the  letters   a  e  o  serve  for  them  also. 

.3.  The  pronunciation  of  the  vowels  see  §  2-7,  that  of  the  simple 
and  compound  consonants,  §  8-14;  the  names  of  the  letters,  §  15. 

VOWELS. 

Simple  Vowels. 
2.  "There  are  ten  principal  vowels: 

a     a         e     e     e     i         goon 
gidttiral^        palatal,  labial. 


"■)  By  Dr.  Lepsius.  London,  Williams  auU  Norgate-,  Berlin,  W.  ilertz,  1863. 


PHONOLOGY.  §  3.  4. 


Each   of  thorn  retains  tlic  same  sound,    wliotlicr  it   ho   sliort   or  h>ng. 
Tlio   jironunciation  of  these  vowels  is  as  follows  : 

a  (full)     sounds  as  a  in  far; 
a  (thin)         „  „   a  in  fat; 

e  (hroad)=e  in  veri/,  there;  o  (broad)^=o  in  not,  nor; 

c  (ftill)    =e  m  heel,  a  in  fate;  o  (full)     ^^^o  in  tohaeco,  note; 

V  (narrow)  between  o,  and  i;  o  (narrow)  between  o  and  u; 

i  (elose)  =  i  in  fill,  ravine;  u  (elose)  =?.(  in  full,  rule; 

Examples  of  the  short  sounds  are: 

fa,  to  take  y  i,  to  take  aivay 

kari,  to  iveigh  so,  to  drop 

se,  to  he  like  so,  to  hold 

se,  to  say  so,  to  earri; 

te,  to  hear;  to  sit;  tu,  to  prdl  out. 

llemark.  'V\\q,  half  ov  thin  'a'  is  only  a  modification  of  the  hroad  or 
fldl  'a',  produced  by  the  influence  of  succeeding  sounds,  as  i,  u;  but 
the  half  or  narrow  e  and  o  are  independent  vowels,  more  frerjuent  than 
the  middle  or  full  e  and  o,  which  occur  seldom  as  independent  vowels, 
but  ver}^  often  as  modifications  of  the  hroad  e  and  o.  See  §  17,  1-3. 

S.  The  vowels  are  either  pure  or  nasal.  The  broad  e  and  o  are 
seldom  found  nasal;  the  full  e  and   o  are  always  jture. 

Nasal  vowels  are  marked  thus:   a   e   i   o   u. 

The  nasal  mark  is  frequently  omitted  on  vowels  adjoining  to  nasal 
consonants  (m,  n,   h,   nw,  ny)  or   other  nasal   vowels. 

ka,  to  hite;  to  remain  nam,  to  walk 

ka,  to  touch;  to  speak  nim,  Ak.  ni,   F.  nyini,  to  kiwiv 

pe,  to  throw,  stretv  kum,  Ak.  kfi,  la  kill 

ti,  to  pincli.,  nip  tane,  to  disturb 

so,  to  he  large  pene,  to  consent 

su,  to  tveep,  cry  tee,  to  stretch,   out. 

me,  mo,  n  e,   no,  nom,  see  §  58.   63. 

4.   1.   The  vowels  are   comnu)nly  sliort,   as  in  the  examj)les   §  2.  3. 
2.  Long  vowels  are  marked  thus:   a  e  e  i  o  6    \\   a  e   i  o   u. 
In  certain  cases  the  vowel  is  doubled. 

pa,  to  strike  te,  to  open  widely  me,  to  satiate 

ta,  to  persecute  pe,  to  search  ii  w in  wi,  to  murmur 

kete,  brightly  foso,  moist  fa,  /lexiblc 

kete,  sti'ictly  kusfi,  dark  koni,  silent. 

Ofii    ue  mmofraase    yaree,    he  was  sick  froht  his  childhood. 


§   5.    6.  PRONUNCIATION    AND    DIVISION    OF    SOUNDS.  3 

3.   Very  sliorf  vowels  are  usually  marked  thus  :  a  e  i   o  u. 

p;1ra  (pi'a.),   to  sweep       s  i  a  ui,  to  strip   ojf  korokoro,   to  imhilge 

t  e  u  a  (ti-cT),  to  sit  s  u  a,  in  he  small  b  i  r  e  hire,   talkative 

here,  to  f/rint/  liua,  to  serape-i  scratch     \<.\v\:ok.\\Yo,  prattling. 

Compound  Vowels. 

*i.  One  kind  of  (iipJiiJio)if/s  consists  of  a  principal  vowel  and  an 
accessory  sound,  heard  whilst  the  mouth  is  closing  again.  This  termi- 
nation is  palatal  (e=V)  <^'i'  i)i  oi"  lfil>i<^tl  (tl'c;  semi-vowel  w,  closer  than 
o  and   n,  or  u) : 

ae     jie    ai,     ee     ei,     oe  oe     oe     ui     lii; 

aw    aw  au,    ew    ew  (ewj  i  w,   ow     ow  (ow)     uw; 

ao  !  is  an  interjection; 

eu  is  only  used  in  foreign  names,   e.  g.  Raropa. 

These  diphthongs  sound  according  to  their  single  constituents. 
Only  three  of  them   are  found  in  English: 

ai  ==/,  y,  in  five.,  ////.  Ex.   ahai,  beer;  ai!   ai!   ay!  ivoe! 

nu^=ou^  ow,  in  sour,  now.     Ex.  asau,  a  fishimj-nct. 
oe^=oi,  oy,  in  oil,  Ijoy.         Ex.  nsoe,  a  thorn. 

Examples  of  the  rest  are  tin;   ibllowing  words: 

kae,  to  renieinher  saw,  to  dance 

asae,  a  hammer  sew,  to  spread  oat 

pee,  a  chisel;  to  chisel  osew,  moth er-iii -lair 

fei,  to  search  osew,  he  grinds 

asoi,  a  handle  siw,  to  pound,  ohstruct 

epoe,  it  withered  pow,  to  jyolish 

okoe,  he  fought  sow,  to  cid,  hatch 

tui,   a  brush  sow,  to  bear  (fruit) 

ohfii,  he  saw;  huw,  to  blow. 

G.  Disyllabie  combinations  of  two  vowcds,  of  which  the  second  re- 
quires a  wider   opening  of  the  month  than  the  first,  ari^  the  following: 

i  a     i  a     i  e     i  e     i  o     e  a 

na    na    ue    ue    no    oa 
tia,  to  tread 
sie,  to  reposit,  bury 
be  a,  to  lie  across 
bua,  to  ansioer 

The  second  vowel  may  assume  palatal   or  labial  termination: 

iae     iei     eae     uae     nei     oae     oee     eaw     eew. 

asiei,  a  burying-place  apuei,  east 

b  e  a  e,  a  rafter  a  s  o  (3  e,  a  resting-place 

mmuae,  an  anstver  peaw,  a  spear. 


oa 

ce 

e  c      c  a  ; 

0  a 

oe 

oe     00     oa. 

pue 

,  to  appear 

soe, 

to  cdight 

tee, 

to  stretch  (out) 

boe. 

to  begin. 

PHONOLOGY.  §  7-9. 


7.  Diphthongs  (and  triplitliongs)  Legiiuiiiig  tvith  a  vcrij  short  voivcl 
have  sprung  from  such  combinations  (§  6),  by  reducing  their  first 
Nowel  to  extreme  shortness  and  thereby  becoming  monosyllabic : 

ia     ia     iaw,     also    ea     ea; 

u  a    li  a    li  a  w     li  jI     u  a     it  a  e.     ii  a  e     xv  o. 

siam,  §4;osia,m,  flour  g'^^'ii  to  fla//;  Inla,  fouf/h 

si  aw,  to  stick,  be  cmir/hf  siiaw,  to  lop  (trees) 

si  ah,  to  recoil  suah,  to  bleed 

si  ah,  to  descend  gCiah,  to  flee 

siane,  to  side,  flank  silane,  to  slit,  tear 

si  aba  w,  to  tie,  tuck  oliuae,  a  broom 

ok  ye  Time,  a  linguist  miio,  to  be  bad. 

The  vowels  in  the  compound  prefixes  wo  a-,  yea-,  mo  a-,  wo  a-  (s>  54) 

ar(^  likewise  pronounced  monosyllabic,  as  diphthongs. 

CONSONANTS. 
Simp le  Co nso nants. 

8.  The  simple  consonants  are 

palatal : 

Mutes :  hard  : 

soft: 
Fricatives : 
Sem.i-voivels :  nasal : 
2m  re  : 

The  sounds  of  p  t  k,  b  d,  f  s  h,  m,  ii,  y,  are  as  in  English; 
g  sounds  always  hard,   as  in  gO  ; 
h  sounds  strong  before  pure,   and  soft  before  nasal,  vowels; 

it  is  scarcely  heard  between  h  and  nasal  vowels:  hhoma,  a  book. 
m  before  f  is  pronounced  with  the  lower  lip  only; 
n  before  y  is  palatal; 
n  =  ng  in  sing; 

V  z=zr  in  ring,  trap,  carry,  never  as  in  car,  card,  here; 
1  is  used  in  foreign  proper  names,  and  in  some  Fante  dialects  for  r; 
w   is  pronounced  with  the  lips  more  contracted  and  less  protruded  than 

in  the  Engl,  w;   it  has  a  very  soft  soxmd  before  o  and  u. 

Lengthened  semi-vowels. 

O.  "^I'he  tiasal  semi-vowels  m  and  h,  when  terminating  a  syllabl(>,  are 
in  some  words  drawn  out  and  continued  for  a  short  space  of  time, 
which  peculiarity  we  express  by  doubling  the  letter. 


ibial, 

dented, 

in' 

'flural, 

V 
b 
f 

t 
d 

s 

k 
h 

m 

11 

h 

w 

r  (1) 

- 

§  10.  TEONUNCIATION    AND    DIVLSIOK    OF    SOUNDS.  5 

fcinii,  tougli,  jlc.iihle  dcmm,  diiin,  \  silent., 

hiinn,   hrUjItt,  Ihjht  komm,  j  fjiiict 

]iYi\\\i\,  plainlij  komm,  entire^  intact 

j>-cnii,  gyeni'i,  prdtn  uiacli        so  an,  6'a/e,  alone. 

The  pure  aenii-voweh  w  and  r  are  tluis  drawn  out  and  lengthened  in 
bercww  (also  written  bered),   (jcntlij;  goroww  (gorow),  ivcah; 
wobog  kirrr  (kirididi)  kog  kurow  no  mu,  the[)  rushed  into  the  town. 

Componnd  Consonants. 
Palatalized  consonants:  ky,   gy,  hy,  ny;  w. 

lO.     1.   The  (juttural  consonants  k  g  h,  when  followed  by  palatal 
vowels,   become  palatal  (shifting  tlie  place  of  contact  from  the  soft  to 
tlie  hard  [)alate)  and  assume  the  accessory  sound  of  y,  whilst  the  tongue 
is  passing  over  into  its  position  for  e,  e,  i ; 
g  assumes  y  also  before  'a' ,-  and  likeAvise  we  have 
n  y  as  a  palatal  combination  before  a,  e,  i. 
^y    Sy    ^^y    ^^^'   pronounced  as  two   compound  sounds  (before  i,  i,  e 

the  y  is  less  distinct);  but  the  combination 
hy  passes  over  into  a  simple  sound,  '/  of  the  Stand.  Alpli.,  equal  to  the 

palatal  ch  in   German  '■Munclien\  similar  to  ch  in  Scotch  locli. 

kye,  to  last  bye,  to  pid  (on,  in) 

kyen,  to  (/row  hard,  dr/j  byew,  to  hurn 

kyi,   to  shun  hyeren,  to  shine,  glitter 

kyi,  to  squeeze  oid  hyira,  to  Mess 

gye,  to  accept,  rescue  nyS,  to  get,  obtain 

gyina,  to  stand  (still)  nyinam,  to  glimpse. 

k  is  not  palatalized 

a.  before  e  which  is  shortened  from  'a'  in  reduplication  (§  10.  20,  4); 
l).  before  e,  e,   i,    when    the  next  syllable  of  the  same  word  begins 
with  t  or  s,  in  the  Asante  dialect  also  when  it  begins  with  r. 

rt.  keka,  red.  fr.  ka,  to  bite:,  kenkan,  red.  fr.  kan,  to  read. 

Z;.  kete,  a  mat  kit  a,  to  lag  hold  of 

kese,  great:,  kisci,  to  turn,  wither,  roast 

kesiw,  to  belch  kere,  As. ^=liy eve,  to  shoiv; 

kente,  a  cloth  of  native  kurukere,  kurukyerew,  to 
manufacture;  scribble. 

2.  The  labial  semi-vowel  w  also  assumes  y  before  e,  e,  i; 
but  instead  of  w  y  we  write  w  (since   1S60). 

wen,  to  watch  we,  to  gnaw,  eat  wia,  to  steal 

were,  to  scrape         we  a,  to  crawl  wie,  to  finish. 


PHONOLOGY.  §  11-  12- 


( )ii    kw    ii'w   h  \v   1!  w  :     ku   ir  u   liu   n  ii ;     t  \V   d  \V   i'\\    n  \v. 

11.  'J'lie  (jHttural  consonants  k  p,-  li  ii  are  frequently  fuuiul  joined 
ivUh  the  soili-vowcl  y^  or  -A  very  short  u.  before  'a',  in  Fante  dialectt; 
also  before  e  e  i.     See  §  12,  2. 

okwa,  incrcli)^  in   vain,  for  nnf/ii)i;i  nkwa,  life 

kwaw,  kokwaw,  io  rnh^  wear  off  ekwae,  ivoocU  fores! 

kwae,  kwati,  to  leave  aside  okwan,  a  waif. 

x\kwani,  pr.  n.  of  a  country 

Okwamui  (Okwamuui),  a  man  of  AJctvani 

Akuapem,  2^>'-  »■  ot  ^  country 

O  k  u  ap  e n  n  i,  an  Alcuapcm-man 

gua,  guan,  liiia,  hiia,  olinae,  see  §4.  7. 

h wan y  ail,  to  stir,  scatter  iiwam,  to  roam 

n  h  w  e  a,   1\  a  li  w  e  a,  sand  n  w  a  n  e,  to  weed 

nliwi,  F.  eli\Yi,  hair  nwene,  to  weave. 

12.  1.  When  the  (/ittturo-lahial  comhi)iafions  (§  11)  arc  followed 
by  e,  e,  i,  then  both  of  the  consonants  undergo  a  change  equal  to, 
and  exceeding,  that  mentioned  in  §  10,   and   we  obtain  the 

palato-lahial  comJiinations  t\v  d  \V  fw  nw,   with   w. 

t  \V   sounds  as  a  mixture  of  ts  {=eli  in  cliurch)  and  w ; 

d  w   is  mixed  up  of  d  (formed  at  the  palate),   w  and  y ; 

f  w  :  the  f  is  formed  by  both  lips,  which  are  contracted  nearly  as  much 
as  for  whistling.  By  this  contraction  of  the  lips  and  the  simulta- 
neous raising  of  the  tongue  for  w,  the  original  sound  of  h  became 
a  sort  of  f. 

11  w  is  equal  to  iiwy,  as  w:=:wy. 

2.  In  Fante  dialects  the  gutturo-labials  have  not  yet  undergone  the 
palatal  transformation. 

t\va,   F.   kwia,  to  cut  fwe  F.  hwe,  to  loolc 

t\Ve,  F.  kwe,  to  pull-,  draw  fwe  F.  hwe,  to  fall,  flog 

tweii  F.  kwen,  to   wait  fwie  F.  hwie,  to  pour 

dwen  F.  gwen,  to  thinJc  efwene  F.  eh  wen,  nose 

ad  we  F.  agwe,  jjaZ»«-n«Wi;enieZ         nwini,  to  leak;  cool, 
o  d  \v  e  11  n  i  11  i  (fr.  o  g  u  a  ii,  n  i n  i),   ram 

o.  In  the  Alcem  and  Asaute  dialects  the  palatal  transformation  has 
been  carried   farther  than  in  the  Akuapem   dialect. 

egua     Ak.  cdwa,  market  hua       Ak.  fwa,  lo  serajxi 

a  gua        ,,      adwa,  seat  hfiam      ,.      fwam,  to  smell 

guan        .,      dwaue,  io  flee  huuii       ,,      fwane,  to  sj'rain 

oguan     ,,      odwanc,  slieep  hiiaii'      „     fwane,  to  peel 

nuuaii     „     iiiiwaue,     „      pL  hiiane    „  „  lo  scralcti. 


§13.  14.  I'KUA'U^'CIATION    AND    DIVISION    OF    SOUNDS. 


liciii.  1.  'VXw  combination  ii'ua,  always  monosyllabic,  is  so  f'roquent, 
that  wo  usually   omit  the  sii;-u  of  shortness. 

Item.  ^.  Wo  write  okwa..,  okwan,  Akwam,  Okw  a  m  n  i,  witli  w, 
but  egua .  .,  oguan,  Akuapem,  (^)kuapenni,  with  u(§l]),  —  be- 
cause the  former  words  have  open  jiyefivcs,  wliich  demand  the  writing 
kwa  (=koa?),  and  the  latter  have  half-open  prefixes,  which  change 
can  only  be  attributed  to  the  influence  of  a  succeeding  u.     See  §  17. 

To  jjrove  the  necessity  of  the  different  writing ,  we  give  the  follo- 
wing affirmative  and  negative  forms  of  some  verbs: 

gwae,  he  falls  off,    neg.  on-wae,  he  does  not  fall  off. 


oguae,  he  parts, 
oware,  lie  marries, 
oguare,  lie  bathes, 


0  n  -  n  u  a e  ;  Ak.  o  d  w  a  e  —  o  n  n  w  a e ; 

o  n  -  w  a  r  e ; 

o  n  - h  u  ar  e;   Ak.  o  d  w  a  re—  on  n  \v  ar  e: 


o-nwane,    he  weeds,   ,,    on-i'iwane; 

o  g  u  a  n,  he  flees,  ,,    o  ii  -  n  u  a  n  ;  Ak .  o  d  w  a  n  e  -  o  h  u  w  a  n  e. 

Wo  must  also  retain  the  I'i  in  analogy  witli  the  forms  sua,  silaw, 
fuaw,  sfiano,  siaw,  siano  (redupl.  susiia,  susuaw,  sunsi'iane, 
sisiaw  &c.)  iu  which  the  li  and  i  have  likewise  become  extremely 
sliort,  so  as  to  have  lost  the  vocalic  sound  and  the  power  of  forming 
an  own  syllable.  —  On  the  other  hand  we  must  put  the  combina- 
tions gua  (nnua),  liua,  by  the  side  of  gwa,  liwa,  hwa,  because 
they  are  entirely  consonantal  in  Ak.  dwa   (nriwa).  fwa. 

System  of  Consonants. 

13.  The  simple  and  compound  consonants  (§8-12)  together  witli 
some  foreign  letters  may  be  arranged  thus: 


Families : 

1.  Labials 
II.  Dentals 

III.  Gutturals 

IV.  Palatals 

V.  (Jruttiiro- 

labials 
VI.  Palato-lahials  tw 


Mufes 
hard       soft 


V 

t  [ts] 

k 

ky 

{a)  k  w 
ib)  k  u 


b 
d  [dz] 

gy 

gw 
gu 
dw 


Lv] 

fzl 


Fricatives 
sharp         flat 

f 

s     [^] 

h  w 
hfi 
fw 


Semi-vowels 
pinre. 
w 


nasal 
m 
n 
h 

"y 

ri  w 
ri  it 
n  w 


[1] 


FANTE  AND  FOREIGN  LETTERS. 

14.  1.  In  some  Fante  dialects  the  t  and  d  are  changed  into  ts 
and  dz  before  c,  e,  i.  (Wliether  there  occurs  a  change  of  ky  and  gy 
into  ts  and  dz,  as  it  takes  ])lace  in  the  Akra  language,  remains  to 
be  ascertained.)  —  The  -Mfantsi  Grammar  by  D.  L.  Carr  and  I.  P. 
Brown,  Cape  Coast,  18G8'  ascribes  to  t,  before  a,  o,  u,  the  sound  of 
the  Engl,  sharp  th  iu  ihin  (//  of  the  Stand  Alph.),  and  to  the  palatal 
fricative  hy  [-/  of  the  Stand.  Alph.)  the  sound  of  s=^sh  in  slup). 


PHONOLOGY.  §  15-17. 


2.  The  fofcUjn  Idlers  v  s  sound  as  iu  English,  z  =  ^  in  azure. 

3.  In  books  on  Geograpliy  and  General  History  we  admit  some 
more  foreign  letters,  e.  g.  the  letter  ^  (=  c7i  iu  Scotch  and  German), 
which  is  frec|uent  iu  the  ncigbouring  Dahomc  Language,  called  Evve 
or  E(/)o  (f/'^^f  with  both  lips),  and  the  German  letters  a  o  ii;  or  we 
give  English,  French,  Italian  &c.  names  in  their  European  orthogra- 
phy, adding  the  pronunciation  in  parenthesis. 

NAMES    OF   THE    LETTERS    IN    THE    ALPHABET. 

15.  In  reciting  the  alphabet,  or  when  spoken  of  in  graminatical 
discussion,  the  single  letters  are  not  named  by  their  English  names, 
but  the  vowels  are  named  by  their  own  sound,  and  the;  consonants 
are  sounded  with  the  addition  of  a  short  e,  or,  where  e  does  not  agree 
with  the  consonant,  with  a  short  a  or  o: 

be  do  fe  go  ha  ka  em  en  eh  pe  re  se  te  wa  we  ye; 
likewise  the  6  foreign  letters:  ^c  le  se  ve  ze  ze. 

But  in  teaching  to  read,  only  one  sound  must  be  given  to  a  letter; 
thus  p  is  only  a  mute  sound  from  the  lips,   b  likewise,   but  softer, 
f  only   a  mute  blowing  between  the  lower  lip  and  the  upper  teeth, 
w,  \v,  y  are  gentle  vocalic  breathings  (w  between  the  nearly  closed  lips, 
y  between  the  tongue  and  the  palate,  \v  from  both  of  these  passages)  &c. 


CHAPTER  II. 
Euphony. 


IC  When  different  sounds,  of  those  which  we  have  hitherto  con- 
sidered separately,  are  united  into  syllables,  words  and  sentences ;  we 
observe  that  certain  laws  of  euphony ,  together  with  a  decided  ten- 
dency of  the  language  to  quickness  and  fluency  of  speech,  and  dia- 
lectical variation,  occasion  different  changes  of  single  sounds,  viz. 
assimilation  and  other  permutation  of  sounds,  elision,  contraction  and 
apocope  of  sounds ;  but  we  have  also  to  note  insertion  and  addition 
of  sounds. 

Assimilation  of  Vowels. 

17.  1.  The  vowels  are  distinguished,  concerning  the  deyree  of 
width   of  the  opening  of  the  mouth  required  for  them,  as 

1.  oxjen:  a  e  o  .3.  half-close:      e  o 

2.  half-open:      a  e  o  4.  close:  i  u. 

The  1st  and  .3d  groups  form  the  class  of  the  odd  nunibers  in  §  2. 
The  2d  and  1th  groups  form  the  class  of  the  even   numbers  (in  do.). 


§17.  EUPHONY. 


2.  In  different  vowels  following-  each  other  the  step  from  the  1st 
to  the  4th  degree  of  width  is  too  great,  the  steps  1-2,  2-3,  3-4  are 
too  small ;  the  previous  vowel  is ,  therefore,  brought  into  agreement 
with  the  succeeding  vowel  by  assimilation,  being  made  either  of  cuiud 
degree,  or  at  least  of  equal  class. 

3.  The  02)en  vowels  a  e  o  remain  as  they  are  before  their  class- 
mates a  e  o,  e  o,  and  also  before  the  thin  ;i ;  but  they  are  changed 
into  the  half-open  coivels  a  e  o  before  i,  u,  the  full  e,  o,  and  the  com- 
binations gya,  nya,  twa,  and  dwa  Ak.  =  gua. 

This  we  see,  e.g.  in  the  prefixes  of  the  following  noiuis: 

aba,  fruit  '>go,  velvet  '}gy*i  father 

ena,  mother  opete,  vulture  ogy^i?  /"'c 

ope,  harnialtaii  obonto,  hoat  onya,  slace 

ade,  thmg  ayi,  funeral  custom  etwa,  scar 

epo,  sea  eti,   otiri,  head  ^'^gua  (adwa),  seat 

obayifo,  sorcerer  osn,  rain;  eh  u,  fear  egua  (edwa),  »»rt/7i;e/. 

The  same  changes  of  a  e  o  occur  in  those  prefixes  of  the  verb  which 
contain  these  vowels  (see  §  89,  7.),  and  in  conipositions. 

4.  The  narrotv  e  and  o,  in  three  pronominal  prefixes  of  the  verb 
(m  e,  wo,  m  o),  either  remain,  or  are  changed  into  i,  \\,  in  the  same 
cases,  as  mentioned  above. 

me  nam,  I  walk  migye,  I  accept  midi,  I  eat 

wote,  thou  hearcst         wuse,  thou  sayest  wuhu,  thou  seest 

moko,  you  go  mix  nya,  yoii  get  mntwam',  you  pass. 

In  compounds  the  change  of  narrow  e,    o,  into  i,  u,  though  existing 
in  pronunciation,   is  seldom   followed  in  writing; 
e.g.  abufuw,  auger,  from  bo  and  fuAv; 
but:  abotn,  despondency,  from  bo  and  tu; 

ahohuru,  heat\  ahenni,  Jcingdom    (not:  ahiihuru,   ahinni). 

5.  A  narrow  vowel  is  seldom  chaiiged  into  a  broad  vowel  (still  of 
the  same  class) ;  e.  g. 

oy  ere,  wife;  ayeforo,   bride  ^  aye  ware  (ay  iivf  ave),  matrimony. 

6.  Vowels  of  the  even  number  are  seldom  changed  into  vowels  of 
the  odd  number,  at  least  the  change  is  not  followed  in  writing,  except 
in  the  syllables  boro  from  buro  (aburow?)  §  39,  3a.  The  words 
ogyefo,  hkurofo  (from  gye,  kurow),  sound,  in  quick  speaking, 
by  the  influence  of  the  syllable  fo,   almost  as  ogyefo,  nkrofo. 

7.  In  words  that  are  written  separately,  the  euphonic  change  of  pro- 
nunciation is  not  followed  in  writing;  e.  g. 

mafwe  bi,  I  have  beheld  some  (not:  mafwe  bi); 

me  ti,  wo  ti,  ne  ti,  my,  thy,  his  head  (not:  mi  ti,  wu  ti,  ni  ti). 
Only  yen,  our,  won,  their,  are  written  yen  and  won,  before    words 
with  close  sounds. 


10  PHONOLOGY.  §  18.  19. 

)^.  Whilst  of  two  vowels  usually  tlie  jn-cccding  is  influenced  by  the 
succeeding  vowel,  we  lind  the  palatal  sul'tix  {§  '29,  3)  governed  by  the 
2> rcced t iiff  yowt'l,  as  in  the  dij)htli()ngs  ae  cc  ci(§5);  sfinii,  sgnc  (§36). 

The  vowel  of  pronouns  that  are  put  as  objects  behind  verbs,  is 
also  changed  in  |)ronunciation  by  preceding  close  vowels,-  still  we 
write:   olifinie,   osi  wo,   otuno,   oyi   nio  (not:  ini,   wu,   nu,   mu). 

AssiniihiUo)/  of  ('ouso)hiiiIs. 

1>S.  1.  Nasal  consonants,  placed,  as  prefixes  or  /;/,  eonipasititni,  be- 
fore another  consonant,  are  thus  adajjted  to  it: 

m   is  j»ut   before  labials,  except  w,   which    prefers   h: 

m  before  f  wants  only  the  lower   lip   for   its  formation. • 

n  dental,  is  put  before  dentals  ; 

n    palatal,  before  the  palatals  y  ny   gy   and  t  \\  ; 

i\  before  all  the  rest. 

2.  Nasal  consonants  before  soft  mutes  make  the  latter  assimilate  to 
the  former. 

3.  So  we  get  the  following  jiinrtifJiis  of  nasal  consonants: 
m  with  p,  f,  m;  mb  change  into  ram; 
u        „      t,   s,   n  ;                                            nd  „  „      nn; 

u        „      tw,  ny,  y;  ngy  „  „  nny; 

n        ,,      k,  kw,  ky,  h,  h  w.  hy,  nw;     ng  .,  .,  nn; 

11  ,,      w,  fw,  nw,    w;  ndw  ,,  ,,  nnw. 
Examples  see  §  42,  2.  95.  96.  12.  Hem.  2. 

Pernintafions  of  Sounds. 

lO.  Other  interchanges  of  letters  -avv  to  be  observed,  besides  the 
cases  mentioned  in  §  17.  IS. 

A.    Vowels. 

In  certain  formations  of  stems,"  in  reduplications  and  in  comjxiund 
words,  we  iind  sJiortened  vowels  corresponding  to,  and  replacing,  broad 
and  full  rourls:  and  in  the  way  of  dialectical  variation,  or  by  the 
influence  of  neigbouring  sounds,  vowels  of  diflfcrent  degree  (§  17)  or 
family  (i.  c.  place  of  formation,  §  2)  may  intercliange. 

Vowels  thus  interchanging  are  : 
a   with  a  e,  before  an   inserted  r  or  n:    bTira,    bera,    mclna,  ten  a; 
with  e  o  i,  in  reduplications  :    k  e  k  a,    p  o  p  a,    twit  w  a,   u  y  i  n  y  a  ; 
with  e  0  e  o,  in  compound  words:   dwetiri,  from   gua,  Ak.  dwa; 
o  d  w  e  n  n i n  i,  fr.  o  g  n  a  h,  Ak.  o  d  w  a  n  e  ;  k  o  k  u  m  a  =  (a)  k  a  -  k  u  m  a  ; 
in  dialects:   okyena,  okaun,  to-niorrou- ;  h  w  on  w  a,  As.  h  wan  wa, 
u'onderoHS;  awowa,  Ak.  yaw  a,  brass.  _^^ 

a  with  e  or  o,  in  dialects:  sare,  grass  \  ad  a  re,  a  billhook,  Ak.  sere, 
ad  ere;  cf. 'nera  or  'nara,  'nor  a,   /jesterdai/, 


§10.  EUPHONY.  11 

e,  o,   witli  e,  o,  before  an   inserted  r:  bere,  porow; 

with  e,  n,  in  redui»lications  :   scse,   soso,    kyekye,  tonton; 
witli   e.   (),   in   dialects:  ye,  io  he  good,  Ak.  ye; 
I',   o,   witli  i,   i1,  before  an  inserted  r:  birebire,  abilrow; 

with  i,  u,  in  reduplications:   sise,  gyigye,   suso,  d\Vud\Vo; 
with  e,  o,  in  dialects:  se,  to  saij,  gye,  io  receive,  Ak.  se,  gye. 
e,  e,  witli  0,  o,  in  dialects :  d  w  e  n  k  u,  d  \v  o  n  k  n :  d  \v  e  n  t  o  f  o,  d  \v  o  n  t  o f  o  ; 
in  the  prefix  of  nouns,  see  §  .35  lirni.  2. 

in  the  3d  pers.  sing,  of  the  pronominal  prefixes  of  verbs,  §  .58  liein.  1. 
also  within  the  same  dialect,  e.g.  in  Akuapem  and  Akyem: 

ahoeden,  ahoodeh,    sfrcngflt;    anieden,  an  node  n,   ai((lac/f/j\ 
anueuyam,   aniionyam,    (animenyam,    animonyam),  <jlorij\ 
a  b  0  e  d  u  r  u ,  a  b  o  o  d  u  r  u,  vdlonr ;  n  s  u  e by  e  w,  n  s  u  g  hy  e  w,  Iwt  water. 
e,  c,  i   with  o,   o,   u,   by  the  influence  of  labial  letters; 

of.  ben,   wen,  yeii,  won,  they  (§58  Rem.  2)\   wesaw,   wo  saw, 
-to  chew;  t  \v  e m,  t  w o  m,  altogether ;  a d  \v  i  ni,  slcilfnl  work,  o  d  w  u  m  f  o, 
a  workman  ;  o  n  w  i  n  i,  cool.,  a  ri  w  u m  m  e  r  e,  evening ,•  o  w  i  r  a ,  o  w  u  r  a, 
maater:,  owisie  Ak.,  owusiw  Akp.,  smoJce. 
ew,    e  w,    iw    pass  over  into  gw,  ow,  uw;    but   we  usually  retain  the 
palatal  vowels,  when  the  Akem  dialect  has  them  w  ithout  the  final  w. 
Ak.   ekye,   a  hat,  Akp.  ekyew,       not:  ekygw; 

a.{'\v ere e,  sugar-cane,    „      afwerew,      „      afwerow  ; 
t  w i,  to  rnh,  „      twiw,  .,      twuw; 

,,     edwie,  atonse,  ,■      edwiw,  „       dwuw; 

.,      dwiri,  to  pnU  down,    „      dwiriw,         ,,       dwuru. 
o  with  i,  in  a  sit  i  w  =  asot  i  w,  deafness. 

Vt.  (Jonsouants. 

Besides  the  dialectical  interchanges  of  consonants  mentioned  in  §  13. 
15.,  Ave  notice  tlie  following  consonants  as  interchan^in^r  within  the 
same  dialect  or  in  different  dialects  : 

p,   w:   posow,   wo  sow,  to  shaJce;  patiriw,   watiriw,  to  slide,  slij); 

h,  w:  awovva  =  awoba,  a  pawn;  Ahawante  =  Ahabaute; 

b,  m:  muka=bukyia,  a  hearth  \  mogya=:bogya,   blood '^ 

m,  n:  gsram,  Ak.  osrane,  the  moon:  koma,  Ak.  konona,  the  heart; 

s,  d,  dz:  so,  F.  do,  ujjon;  asase,  F.  dade,  dadze,  the  land,  earth: 

d,  n :   a n  a d  w  0,  a  d  a  d  w  o,  night;  n  n  e  =  d  a  y  i,  to-dag ;  ne ,  d e,  to  he ; 

d,  r:  'nera  =  'ne  da,  gesterdag;  horo,  Aky.  hodoo,   various: 

r,  n:  trtl,   tena,  to  sit:  mva,  mana,  to  send,  transmit', 

n,   u:  abien'=:abienu,   mmieuu,  two;  neri  =  ueno,  §53  lion. 

h  at  the  end  of  words  is  in   F.  n,  in  Aky.   often  palatal  n. 
ny,  n:  nim,   F.   nyim,    to  know  \    ninsen,    nyinsen,    to  conceive-.! 

op  any  in,    op  an  in,    an  elder,  a  ^yerson  superior  in  gears  or  rank. 
ny,  y:  yem,  F,  nyem,  to  conceive. 
k,  h:  akek  ant  were,  alialiaut  we  re,  a  scorpion. 
h,   s,  f w :  hintiw,  Aky.  sunti,  As.  fwinta,  to  stumhle. 
h,   w:   a  hob  a,  F.  =;  awoba,  a  wow  a,  a  j^o^wn- 
h,  y  :   hara  Ak.,  yera  Akp.,  yew  F.,  to  he  lost. 


PHONOLOGY.  §  20.  21, 


Elisit))i  of  Sounds,  (did  Cou(r(K:tion. 

20.  1.  Vvri)  ahoti  vowels  before  an  inserted  r  are  iVcqueiitly  elided, 
csix'cially  al'ter  the  strony  eoiisoiuoils  p,  t,  k,  f,  s,  and  when  the  vowel 
after  tht;  r  is  open  (a,  e  or  o),  or  loiif/,  or  when  tlie  sijUahle  (erminates 
in  III  or  11.   Two  syllables  arc  thereby  contracted  into  one  (§  2.'3,  o);  e.  g. 

]ira,    tra,   kra,   sra,   fra,   frc;   bebre,  fremfrem,   mpren. 

2.  'J'he  vowel  'a'  after  very  short  i  and  u  is  elided  in  tlie  redupli- 
cation sijllahlc-^  e.  g. 

siaw,   sisiaw;   siui,  susiia;  sianc,   sinsiane;  guan,  gunnuan. 

o.  Two  vowels  coming  together  are  either  contracted  into  one  long- 
vowel,  e.  g.  gyaasefo,  domestics,  or  the  preceding  vowel  is  elided 
and  the  second  remains  short;  so  the  vowels  c  and  o  are  frequently 
elided  in   the  jjronouns  me,  ue,   also   wo,  no    (§55.   56.  58.). 

4.  Some  combinations  of  three  sounds  are  reduced  to  one  or  two: 
k  w  a,   shortened   into   ko,   in   com])osition   and  reduplication: 

a  k  w  a  t  i  a,  a  k  0 1  i  a,  a  short  man ;  a  k  w  a  k  w  a  r  il,   a  k  w  a  k  o  r  a,  an  old 

man ;  K  w  a  s  i,  Kofi  (§41,4);  k  w  a  w,  k  o  k  w  a  w  ;  k  w  a  11,  k  o  n  k  w  a  11. 
-aba,  aw  a,  a:  taw  a,  tcl,  tobacco',  toawa,  to  a,    <t  S)n(dt  c<dahasli. 
-eba,  ewa,  i\:  ad  we,  a  pahn-md-lccrncJ,  pi.  (1111  we  wa)    1111  \Vea; 

nkycrekyerewa,   hkyereky er;!,  a  drij  wilderness. 
-iba,  iwa,  ua:  ad  nan,  Ak.  adiban  e, /bofZ;  A  kosua  ^=  Ak  wasiba. 
-0  b  a,  o  w  a,  a :  a  b  0  r  a  =  a b  6  r  o  w  a,  a  European  lad/j. 
-oba,  owa,  a:  akura  =  akuro w a,  a  villa(je. 
-ana,  ona,  6a:   amoa,  Ak.  amana,  a  hole,  pit;  afoa,  Ak.  afiina,  a 

sword  (of  state)',  asonomfoa,  asomfana,    a  swallow. 
-ina,  a:  ouyct,  Ak.  onyina,  a  siUc-cotton-tree. 

5.  The  semi-vowel  y,  which  is  very  slightly  articulated  before  i, 
may  occasionally  be  cast  out : 

fwe  u'  'iye  =  fwe  no  yiyc!    looJc  for  hint  (or:  at  it)  well! 
cbeye 'ye  =  cbcye  yiy e,  it  will  he  well; 
obaifo  =  ob  ay  ifo,  6orcc>'er.    Cf.  ni=ne  y  i,  §  200,  1  liem. 
The  semi-vowel  w  may  likewise  be  cast  out  before  u: 

awurade,  (in  poetry)  a'urade,  lord.    Cf.  asawu,  asau,  a  net; 
O  k  w  a  w  u,  Kwau,  prr.  n.  of  a  country ;  K  w  a  k u  =  K wawuku  (§  4l ,  4). 

Apocope. 

21.  1.  'J'erminating  vowels  are  sometimes  cut  off,  though  there  be 
no  vowels  or  words  closely  following  after  them.  So  the  postposition 
mix  is  most  frequently  reduced  to  m',  especially  in  compounds: 

nsam',  yam',  mfem',  tirim,  anim,   anom',   asom'; 
twam',  to  pass  hy\  paem',  teem',  bom'  or  bom',  to  crij  out. 
On  the  objective  pronouns  see  §  56. 

Menyam'!  I  shall  get  you!  nen  =ne  no,  §  53  llcm. 

2.  Final  m  is  cast  off  in  Ak,  ku,  ni  =  kum,  to  liill;  nim,  to  Icnow. 

[This  might  be  exp^'essed,  in  §  22:  The  final  consonant  m  is  added 
to  ku,  ni  (Ak.)  in  the  Akp.  dialect.  But  the  written  language  is  based 
on  the  latter  dialect,  and  in  Fante  those  words  are:  kum,  nyim.J 


§  22.  23.  EUPHONY.  13 


Insertion  and  Addition  of  Sounds. 

22.  1.  By  the  insertion  of  r  between  the  consonant  and  the  vowel 
of  a  syllable  (or  of  n,  when  the  vowel  is  nasal),  voir  stems  uv  <Ha- 
ledical  variations  of  stems  are  formed. 

Cf.  pa,  to  taJce  off  supcrftciallij ;  pra,  para,  to  sweep. 

ma,  to  give:,  man  a  (mra),  to  send,  remit,  forward  to. 

h  0 r 0,  h oho,  h  o  h o r  o  ,  to  wash ; 

kyere,  kyekye,  kyekyere,  to  lilnd. 

One  dialect  may  have  a  form  without  r  (or  n),  another  the  lorm 
strengthened  by  r  (or  n). 

fi,  Ak.  firi,  to  proceed  from;  hii,  Ak.  huuu,  to  see; 
du,  Ak.  durn,  to  arrive;  duru,  Ak.  d  u,  heavi/. 

Insertion  of  r  also  takes  place  in  a  few    inHexional    forms  : 
ba,  to  come,  imp.  bera;  ko,  to  go,  pret.  koe,  Ak.  kore;  inf.  kgree. 
§95,  1,  9.  10.  2,  3.  §  104,  4.' 

The  insertion  in  most  of  tliese  cases  creates  a  new  syllable.  Tlie  vowel  after  the  r  is 
o4ten  to  be  considered  as  the  original,  and  that  before  r  only  as  an  auxiliary  vowel,  when 
the  latter  is  very  short. 

2.  New  stems,  or  dialectical  variations  of  stems,  or  derivatives  are 
sometimes  formed  by  the  addition  of  a  new  syllable,  consisting  of  r 
(or  n)  with  a  secondary  vowel: 

Avare,  Ak.  wa,  tu  he  long]    ago,  agoru,  Ak.  agoro,  iJ?rt^; 
ahumobg,  Ak.  ahfimgbore,  commiseration. 

3.  Insertion  or  addition  of  sounds  is  frequently  met  with  in  words 
taken  from  foreign  languages; 

girase,  ^Za.ss;  mfensere,  a  tvindotv]  bensere,  a  bason; 
kobere,   copper;  sirikyi,  silk;  bukil  F.,  bru  kti' Akp.,   a  Ijaolc; 
twaku,  clialk;  kesii,  cheese;  tgpo',  a  tub;  suku,  school. 


CHAPTER   III. 
Syllables. 


STRUCTURE  OF  SYLLABLES. 

23.  1.  A  princijJal  si/llable  conahts  oi'  a  consonant,  simple  or  com- 
pound, and  a  vowel  or  diphthong  (or  triphthong  §  7),  which  may  be 
followed  by  one  or  two  nasal  consonants;  e.  g. 

^^1  Sy^i  d^>  PQf-5  se^v,  be-ra,  ma-nil,    siaw,  guae; 
som,   dwell,  komm,  pa  em,  kwaem. 

Bern.  Mute  and  fricative  consonants  never  end  a  syllable,  except 
in  foreign  names. 


14  PHONOLOGY.  §  24. 

2.  A  seroHflari/  fujllahlc  consists 
a.  of  one  vowel  or  diphthong,   standing  by  itself : 

wo   a!   ko  e!  Kwasi  e,   gyina  ho  o!   ai!   aol   ei! 

h.   ol'  one,    two    or    three    vowels    and    nasal  semi-vowels,   prefixed   or 
al'Hxed  to  principal  syllables: 

o-ko,   oh- kg,   gh-ko,   ghh-kg,   e-se,  a-fuw,   ni-pa,   ah-k;T; 
ti-a,  ti-a,   pe-aw;  o-tn-o,   g-f'\Ve-ani,   a-du-ah. 

.'3.  A  fdntractcd  syJlahlc  is  made  from  two  or  three  syllables  by  the 
elision  of  sounds  in  quick  speaking : 

pra=pa-ra;  fre^fe-re;  kroni' =;  ku-r  d  m',  kfi-row  mu: 
0  -  g  n  a  -  e  e  m'  =  o-guaee  ni u ;  m  ni  o  - 1  r  a  a  -  s  o  =  m-mo-fa -ra-a-se. 
t  a  =  t  a  -  w  a ;    a  -  k  u  -  r  a  =  a  -  k  n  -  r  o  -  ^^'  a  ;  §  20,  1 .  ."3  -5.   21,1. 

24.  Divisio)/  of  .si/lJahlcs  is  generally  easy;  only  nasal  consonants 
may  occasionally   present   difliculties. 

1.  ]\rute   and  fricative  consonants  btdong  to  the  i'ullowing   syllable: 

w  a  - 1  \v  a  m'   a  -  k  y  e  ;   g  - 1  r  a   a  -  b  a  li  -  k  e  -  s  e  m'. 

2.  Of  two  nasal  consonants  between  vowels  the  one  b(dongs  to  the 
preceding,   and  tlie  other  to  the   succeeding  syllable: 

a-hem-mah,   a-hen-nah,   a-heh-hua,   h-koni-nig. 

3.  A  single  (or  double)  m,  n  or  li ,  when  prefixed  to  a  ])rincipal 
syllable  beginning  with  the  same  consonant ,  may  be  considered  as 
belonfrin":  to  it  : 

mma-gnm',   nna-da,   iihu-so,   ahe-ne-mma   (or:  'ma-gum'&c.) 
mmo-fra  no  mm  ma  ha!  /he  child  rev  shall  iint  emi/r  here! 

4.  A  single  h  between  two  consonants  in  compound  words  belongs 
to  the  preceding  syllable: 

a-b  ah-  a-  se-a-bah-a-se;  amah-  am  ah. 

In  formations  like  gbehe,  he  approached,  eh  one,  d  sivcUcd,  so  he, 
a  strainer,  a  division  of  the  two  last  syllables  is  better  avoided. 

5.  The  combinations  ny,  hw,  hw  require  often  particular  attention, 
whether  the  n  or  h  belongs  to  the  preceding  or  the  succeeding  syllable  : 

g-pa-nyih;  g-pan-yi-fo  (from  pani  and  yi);  bg-hwoma; 
h-wa-hwe-ne;   hwo-hwa,   a-dgh-wo-wa  (fr.  d  g  m,   a-wo-wa); 
on -ye,  he  is  not  good]  on-nye  (fr.  gye),  he  does  not  accept:, 
gn-yaw,  he  does  not  scold;  gnn-yaw,  he  shall  not  scold]  but  fr.  gyaw: 
on  -ny  aw  no,  he  does  not  leave  him;  onn-ny  aw  no,  he  shall  not  I. him. 
ghh- wae,  he  shall  not  fall  off]  gnu- h  wane,  he  shall  not  weed. 
Cf.  §  12  Hew.  ^.  and  §  95. 


§  25.  EUPiioNV.  15 

OF  TONE  AND  ACCENT. 

Tone  of  Vowel ."i  and  Semi-votvcls. 

JJ»>.  Every  syllabic,  has,  in  comparison  witli  ncif^libourinfj;-  syllables, 
either  low  or  high,  or  mUldJc  tone.  Syllables  with  lonj^  vo\v(^ls  ov  (li])h- 
thon^'S  or  final  m,   n,   I'l  may  even  have  two  tones. 

Tlcm.  The  tone  must  be  {listinfi,-aishe{l  from  the  accent  or  stress,  §  20. 
hi  common  writing  and  in  books  for  tln^  people  we  mark  the  tone 
only  in  cases  of  ambiguity;  but  in  grammar  and  dictionary,  and  i'or 
the  study  of  the  language  by  foreigners ,  an  accurate  designation  ol' 
the  tones  and  the  stress  is  necessary.  Dialectical  variations,  howe^('r, 
exist  in  tone  as  well  as  in  sounds. 

These  tones  may  be  denoted  by  accentual  marks,  or  by  figur(>s  in- 
dicating the  degree  of  elevation  of  voice,   as:    adaka   (ir/^),  a  box. 

We  give  the  following  rules  for  markhif/  the  tones: 

1.  Lotv-toncd  syllables,  preceding  the  first  high  tone  of  a  word  or 
sentence,  are  left  uninarked\  e.  g.  aberewa    (iini),    on    old  wonucn. 

2.  'Jlie  first  high  tone  in  a  word  or  sentence  is  mark(^d  with  the 
acute  accent;  e.g.  oba,  child\  wanyan,  he  is  awalccd\  mawie,  1 
ha  tie  finished;  ade    no,  that  thing;  oyc],  doing  (inf). 

3.  Subsequent  middle  tones,  i.  e.  high  tones  abating  by  one  stc]) 
or  successive  steps,  are  likewise  marked  with  the  ande  accent;  e.  g. 
obonto  (m-i),  (C  boat;  ne  ba  anyan  (i,;!,:42),  his  child  is  aivahed  [the  a 
of  any  an  (13)  has  been  attracted  by  the  preceding  a  and  thereby 
made  equally  high,  whereas  the  a  has  become  middle  (:!•.>)];  mawie 
ade  no  ye  (u4,4:i,:i,:i),  /  have  finished  doing  that  thing. 

4.  Loiv  tone  after  or  between  high  tones  is  marked  with  the  grave 
accent;  e.  g.  gba,  he  conies;  any  An,   it  has  become  sour. 

5.  As  many  syllables,  as  follow  in  egual  tone  after  a.  syllable  mar- 
ked according  to  the  rules  under  2-4,  are  left  nnniarJced.,  so  that  each 
mark  avails  for  all  the  following  syllables  of  the  same  word  or  suc- 
ceeding words,  until  another  mark  of  tone  or  a  mark  of  punctuation 
follows ;  e.  g.  Abo  k  obi  (1333);  akoko  ani  sa  bfirofua  (133,33,1,1322). 

6.  Long  voivels  and  diphthongs  have  either  one  or  tivo  tones: 

a.  high,  marked  ;i,  a,  ae;  as:  f6,  plainly^  b a ,  branch;  apae,  it  is  split. 

b.  low,  a,   a,  ae,  as:  fe,  deeply;  te,  straiglitway.,  a,-^-X^kQ.,  it  is  split. 

c.  IoWt  high,  ii\  a',  ae:  ka,  ring;  epai)ae,  it  splits;  nkae,  remnant. 

d.  high,  middle,  a,  a,  ae:    nnada,  deceit;    mpjlpae,   cracJi;    nkae, 
remembrance ;  t  e  t  e,  asthma. 

e.  high,  low,  ^,  A\  ae:  girase,  glass;  kesfi,  cheese;  osui,  he  wept. 

7.  Very  short  voivels  may  have  their  own  tones ;  in  printing  either 
the  accent  is  put  after  the  letter,  or  the  sign  of  shortness  given  up : 
oka'ra,  soul;  korow,  core.  In  other  cases  the  very  short  vowel  has 
the  tone  of  the  succeeding   vowel ;  e.  g.   g  o  row  w,  weak. 


16  PHONOLOGY.  §  2G. 

H.  The  nasal  consonants  m,  n,  u,  may  liavc  tlioii-  own  tones: 

a.  as  jn-etixes  (§  29,  2.  40.  91,  l(j.  92.): 

mp4  (13),  bed;  ne  mpa  (3, :i2),  his  bed-, 

nsu  (13),  loater;  eh  a  nsu  (13,32),  the  wafer  of  t/iis  place. 

oyi  11  kg  (13,33)!  tlus  one  shall  go! 

oyi  h'ko  (13,13),    this  o)ie  does  not  (jo. 

ue  nk  iVko  (3,1,33)!  his  mother  shall  go! 

ne  na  nko  (3,1,13),  his  mother  does  not  go. 

won  te  (313)?  do  g  oil)  lot  hear'f'  wi'in  tic  (iukj)  ?  do  goii  not  listen '•f 

koseno  se:  onnko(3i3)!   go  fell  him  fli.((t  he  shall  not  go! 

b.  as  remnants  of  full  syllables : 

OS  ram'  Ak.  osrane,  moon,  inoidh; 

abieiV  =  ab  ienu,  Ak.  mmieiiu,   two. 

aninV  =  ani  m u,  (in  the)  face;  usam"  =  nsa  in  u,  in  the  ha)id ; 

yam'  =  ya   m  u,   (in  the)  beUg]   epom'  =  epo  m  u,  in  the  sea. 

c.  as  final  letters  of  verbs  in  some  inflexional  forms : 

op  am'  uo(u3,i),  he  expells  him;  op  am"  no  (131,1),  he  expelled  him. 
9.  Final  w  may  likewise  liave  its  own   tone : 

a.  merely  as  termination  of  a  diphthong:   aferaw',  the  clock-bird; 

b.  in  some  intlcxional  forms  of  verbs  (§  95,  5):  gsew'  ne  kete,  he 
spread  his  mat]  the  sinking  of  the  high  tone  might  also  be  marked 
thus:  osew;  in  gsew,  he  spreads-,  the  w  partakes  of  the  same  low 
tone  with  the  e. 

Word-accent  or  btress  on  Sgllables. 

t20.  The  accent  or  stress  of  a  word  is  the  empliatic  pronunciation 
of  a  syllable,  which  distinguislies  it  from  other  syllables  of  the  same 
word. 

In  verbs.,  the  stress  depends  much  on  the  changes  of  tone;  it  is  either 
on  prefixes,   or  on  the  stem,  as  we  shall  see  in  its  place.    §  91  Bem. 

In  nouns,  the  stress  lies  either  on  the  first  high-toned  syllable,  or 
on  the  low-toned  next  before  it.  See  §  40.  In  the  former  case  the 
stress  does  not  want  an  own  mark;  in  the  latter,  we  may  put  a  small 
perpendicular  line  or  the  grave  accent  after  the  syllable  that  has  the 
stress,  e.g.  Unyame,  Onyankopoh,  God.  But  we  may  as  well 
put  the  grave  accent  on  the  vowel  of  the  syllable:  Onyame,  Onyan- 
kopoh (113,  ii3->);  for,  as  it  would  not  be  required  to  indicate  the 
low  tone  (according  to  §  25,  1),  its  presence  indicates  that  the  syllabic 
marked  with  it  has  lotv  tone  with  a  stress. 

Cf.  obea,  ahosan,  adwinni,  odabo,  ahohuru,  ohahini,  potrobodwo, 
aboa,  ayisa,     adwuma,  gpfipo,  anibere,    gyafunu,  afofanto. 

In  nouns  with  low  tones  throughout,  the  first  syllable  of  the  stem 
usually  has  the  stress;  e.g.  wofa,  asafo,  aujinsc,  kontromfc. 


§  27-29.        FORMATION  OF  WORDS  IN  GENERAL.  17 

IMIIT  II. 

(OF  WORDB    (ETYMOLOGY). 


CHAPTER  !. 
Formation    of  Words   in   g'eneral. 

27.  All  words,  cunccniiiig'  their  lurm  and  origin,  iirc,  cither  j}rt- 
niiflvc,  or  flcrivniivr.,  or  ronqjound. 

Prhtiiliccs.  Fr'niiari)  and  Secojidcoij  Stems. 
2<S.   1.   The  real  primitives   of  the  language  arc  what  we  call  .iiiii- 
plc  stems,  all  of  them  beginning  with   a  single  or  compound  consonant. 

2.  Fr'nuari)  steins  have,  beside  the  initial  consonant,  one  short  vowed  ; 
secondar/j  stems  have  their  vowel  enlarged  into  a  long  vowel  or  diph- 
thong, or  arc  augmented  by  a  final  m  or  n  (F.  n),  or  increased  by  an 
accessory  syllable  which  begins  with  r,  n,  or  m,  or  seem  to  be  cam- 
pounded  of  two  of  such  simple  stems. 

3.  We  distinguish  fen  forms  or  variations  of  simple  stems,  repre- 
sented by  the  following  verbs  of  1,  2   and   o   syllables: 

1.   pa,   2.  paw,  3.  pa,  4.   pae,   5.  pam  and  pan; 

G.  p  i  a,  7.  p  a  r  e,  p  e  r  e,  8.  p  a.  r  a  (p  r  a),  p  i  r  a;  9.  p  a  t  a,  1 0.  p  a  t  i  r  i  w. 
The   last  vowel  of  the  forms  under  6-8  may   be  enlarged  or  augmen- 
ted as  the  vowel  of  the  form   under   1    is  in  the  forms  under  2-5  : 
6.  peaw,  tia,  f  weam;  7.  fanim,  screw;  8.  trah,  tjina,  yeraw,  horan. 

The  forms  under  9.  10.  seem  to  be  compounded  of  two  of  the  forms 
under  1-8,  but  are  in  meaning  like  other  simple  stems,  i.  e.  the  two 
parts  do  not  exist  by  themselves  with  separate  meanings,  the  uniting 
of  which  would  give  the  meaning  of  the  compound, 

4.  tSuch  stems  are  used  as   verbs,  adjectives  and  adverbs. 

But  simple  pronouns  also  (though  they  partly  assume  prefixes),  that 
cannot  be  traced  back  to  existing  simple  stems,  and  simple  numcraJs 
(usually   with  prefixes)  are  considered  as  primitives. 

5.  Exotics,  i.  e.  words   borrowed   from    foreign   languages,    are,    also 
reckoned  among  the  primitives;  e.g.  brii,  blue;  girase,  glass. 
(These  have  frequently  characteristical  tones;  see  §  22,  3). 

Derivatives.    Prefixes,  Suffixes  and  Beduplication. 
20.     1.  Derivatives  are  formed   from   primitives    by  the    accrunient 
of  prefixes  or  suffixes  (besides   changes  in  tone)    and   l)y  rodnplic<(tio}i. 


ETYMOLOGY.  §  29. 


"2.  Tlie  )U)))i)i)(iJ  i^fcfixes^  i.  o.  prefixes  found  in  nouns,  adjectives  and 
numerals,  are  a,  e,  g,  (or  a,  e,  o,  §  17),  ni  (n,  I'l,  §  18),  am  (an,  an). 
See  i^  85. 

(Tlie  prefixes  ol'  tlie  verb,  by  wliieli  not  new  words,  but  new  forms  of 
the  same  word  are  obtained  in  the  process  of  inflexion,  see  §  SO.  91.  9G.) 

3.  The  nominal  suffixes  are: 

the  pahxtal  suffix  e,  e  or  i,   i,  Ak.  ee,  ie;   see  §  36;  (the  suffix  e  or  i 
occurs  also  in  the  inflexion  of  the  verb,  §  91,  2.  3,  103.  104,  4.  5.); 
the  diminutive  suffix  wa,  sometimes  ma,  often  contained  in  a;  see  §37; 
the  personal  suffix  n  i,  f o ;  see  §  38. 
the  plural-suffix  uom;   see  §  42,  5. 

4.  liedujAicatioii  is  the  doubling  of  a  stem  by  a  repetition  of  the  whole 
stem,  or  a  prefixing  of  a  shortened  form  of  it.  On  the  change  of  vo- 
wels in  the  latter  case  see  §  19,  a,   e,   o,   e,   o  ;  §  20,  2. 

popo,  dadcT,  tiatia,  pirapira,  patir  ip  atir  i  w  ; 
keka,  pop  a,  bo  bo,  sesew%   pTipae,  pom  pan,  guhiiuan. 
The  reduplicated  form  itself  is  also   called  a  reduplication. 

Almost  all  verbs  may  be  reduplicated,  some  of  them  even  twice ; 
e.g.  fefafefa,  bebabebare,  from  fa,  bare.  Some  verbs  are  used 
only  in  the  reduplicated  form,  e.  g.  hwinwi,  to  inurmia:  Cf.  §99. 

Of  many  adjectives  once  or  twice  reduplicated  forms  are  used  besides 
the  simple  forms,  and  some  adjectives  ar(!  only  found  as  reduplications. 
See  §  69,  2  a.  70. 

5.  From  reduplication   we  may  distinguish : 

a.  rcUcration,  by  which  only  one  syllable  (of  two  or  more)  is  repeated: 

koki'iro,   kokuroko,  targe '^  krAua,   k  ran  a  nana,  silent', 
h.  repetition,    by  which  the  whole   word  (stem  and  prefix)  is  repeated : 

hkakra- h  ka  k  r  a,  little  hi/  little;  aboabo,  stonn]  §69,  2  c. 
akoko-akuko,  qiiarellings  (from  ko,  to  fujht,  oko,   ako,  a  fight., 
fighting]  this  is   a  repetition  of  a  reduplication). 

6.  Derivatives  may  also  be  formed  from  primitives  in  two  ways 
(e.  g.  by  a  prefix  and  a  suffix)  at  the  same  time;  e.  g. 

anome,  fr.  nom;   adomma,  fr.   doii;  gsomfo,   fr.  som; 

and  from  derivatives  (e.  g.  reduplications)  in  one  way,  or  in  two  ways 
at  the  same  time;  these  are  called:  seeondary  derivatives;  e.  g. 
gunnuaiie,  ntwintwame,  osisifo,  osafoni,  nnonnomma. 

llein.  Derivatives  in  form  (nouns  or  other  words  consisting  of  a  pre- 
fix and  a  simple  or  reduplicated  stem)  may  be  considered  as  2)rimi- 
tives  in  meaning,  when  no  simpler  word  still  existing  in  the  language 
can   bi'   slidwn,   from    whicli   tliey   are  evidently  derived. 


§30.  31.        FORMATION  OF  WORDS  IN  GENERAL.  19 

Conqiotinds. 
30.  A  (ontpound  ivord  is  formed  of  two  or  mure   words,    each    of 
which  may  be   either  primitive  or   derivative  or  eA'cii   compound. 

1.  Pt'rfcrf  conipijuuds  ayf"  consolidated,  frequently  by  assumiiij;-  new 
or  changed  prefixes,  by  elision  or  assimilation  of  sounds  and  changes 
of  tone;  i.  e.  the  two  simple  words  have  become  completely  incorjio- 
rated  and  appear  as  one  new  word  (§  39.  59.  69,  2d.  3.  78.  80.  81,  1.);  e.g. 

a  y  e  f  0  r  0  (=  g y  e  r  e  f  o  f  o  r  o,  a  new  wife),  bride ; 

ahemfi     (=ohenc  fi.  flie  Icivcjs  hoDie  or  dtcdliruj),  court  \ 

a  k  y  e  r  e  k  y  e  r  c  k  w  a  n  (fr.  k y  e  r  e,  to  show,  g  k  w  a  n,  kuij).,  foreftngcr. 

2.  Irupcrfect  co)itpounds  or  loose  combinations,  especially  of  new 
formation,   and  some  repetitions,   are  connected  by  a  hyphen  : 

Owu-fida,  (lit.  deafh-friday)  Good  Frida// : 

wo  tumi-nsa,    ihij  {hand  of  might,  or)  might  if  hand-^ 

wo  agya-ayamye,  thg  {goodness  of  a  father)  fatlicrhj  goodness \ 

mmiako-mm  iako,  one  hg  one.   §79. 

3.  Ohscure  compounds  are  apparent  compounds,  the  single  consti- 
tuents of  which  have  not  yet  been   clearly  shown;  e.  g. 

nsatea,  finger  (nsa  =  hand;  but  tea  =  ?)-, 
nkontompo,  pjerfidg  (konton  =  ^c  bend?  po  =  ?). 

licm.  1.  In  some  cases  different  icags  of  writing  have  been   used  in 
our  books,  when,   without  impairing  the  sense,  two   words    are  written 
either  separately  or  as  imperfect  or  full  compounds ;  e.  g. 
agya  nom,  agya-nom,    agyanom,   §  42,  .5; 
wear  a,    woaukasa   or  woara,   woankasa,  §59. 
2.  The  term  '■compound  stenf  may  be  used  in  a  twofold  way : 

a.  for  verbs,  adjectives,   adverbs  or  nominal  stems  of  the  forms  under 
9.  10  (§  28,  3),  which   we  might  call:  twin  stems; 

b.  for  any  word  evidently  compounded  of  two  or    more    words,    witli 
the  exclusion   of,  and  in  contradistinction  from,   its  prefix  : 

a- hood  en,  strength-^   a-ponkokwan,   a  {horses'  wag)  highuaij. 

CHAPTER  ii. 
The  Parts  of  Speech. 


31.   We  distinguish   eight   parts  of  speech,  viz. : 

1.  Nouns  5.   Verbs 

2.  Pronouns  6.  Adverbs 

3.  Adjectives  7.  Conjunctions 

4.  Numerals  8,  Interjections. 

The  Prcjjositions  are  spoken  of  as  Auxiliari/  Vertjf^-,  and  under  the 

head  of  Adverbs  as  Postpositions.  §108.  109.115-131. 


20  ETYMOLOGY-  §  32.  33. 

1.  NOUNS. 

J?tJ.  N'ounti  (also  callcfl  substantive  nouns,  subslanfivcs)  arc  iiaincs 
of  (lifforcut  things.,  which  may  be : 

1.  animate  things,  oa-  persoiis  and  animals-^ 

2.  inanimate  tilings,  existing  a.  as  single  individuals,  b.  ;is  materials 
(substances   which  are   not  made  up  of  individual  parts); 

3.  places,   defined  parts  of  space   in  general  or   of  certain   things  ; 

4.  times,  either  time  in  general,  or  divisions  of  it; 

5.  quantities,  also  numbers,  measures,  weights;  (nouns  denoting  a 
dctinitc   number,  see  Numerals,  §76-80); 

G.  (jiialilies,  whether  relating  to  material  objects,  or  to  the  mind, 
or  to   both,   or  also  to   actions; 

7.  states  and   o<)nditiu)is  of  mind   or  body,  or  of  things  in   general  ; 

8.  actiuns. 

1.  onipa,  a  man;  ohene,   a  king;  aboa,   a  beast;   ok  ore,  an  eagle. 

2.  gdan,  a  house;  dua,   a  tree;  a  so,   an  ear;  nsu,   water;  s'lka,  gold. 

3.  gsoro,  ilie  npx^er  part  or  parts,  heaven;   w  inac,  tvorld;  ofi'e,  home. 

4.  ebere,   <(,  time;  eda,   a  dag;  afe,  afrihyia,   a  gear. 

5.  dodow,  multitude;  sin,  a  p)icce;  a  fathom  {of  cloth); 
takii,  a  iveight  of  gold-dust,  worth  nearly  7d. 

tap 6,  30  coivries  (half  a  string); 
G.   kese,  magnitude;  teterete,  breadth;  ahoofe,  t>eautg; 
ayamye,  Idndness,  liberality;  ntem,  sioiftness. 

7.  abufuw,  wrath;  oyare,  sicJcness;  una,  sleejj;  ah  oh  urn,  heal; 

8.  ok  6,  fight;  as  aw,  dance;  aguah,  flight;  nsesa,  exchange. 

J5e$.  1 .  Proper  nouns  are  names  of  single  persons,  things,  places, 
times  &c.  to  distinguish  them  from  others  of  the  same  kind. 

Xoa,   Kwasi  (persons);  Firaw  (a  river);   Krobg  (a  mountain, 
country,  language);  Kumase  (a  town);  Fida,  Own-fid  a  (days). 

2.  Common  nouns  denote  v^hole  classes  of  things,  as  mentioned  in 
§  32,  1-5,  and  any  single  individual,  or,  when  referring  to  materials 
(§  32,   2  b),  any  particle,  belonging  to  such  a  class. 

Collective  nouns  denote  a  collection  of  individual  things  forming  one 
whole;   as:   gman,   a  people,  nation;  edgm,  an.armg;  hw  m',  a  forest. 

3.  Abstract  nouns  denote  qualities,  states  and  actions,  considered 
as  unconnected  with  the  substances  to  which  they  belong.  §  32,  6-8. 
The  nouns  belonging  to  §  32,  3-5.   also   are  generally  abstracts. 

Names  of  things  that  have  an  independent  existence,  as  those  in 
§  32,  1.  2,  arc  called  concrete. 

Jicm.  .Since  many  nouns  are  used  with  different  meanings,  these 
meanings  may  pass  over  from  one  class  of  nouns  to  another,  from 
concrete  to  more  or  less  abstract,  or  from  abstract  to  concrete  notions. 
E.g.  akiitu,   orange,    uso,   ashes,    are   concrete   nouns;   but  when   used 


§  34.  35.  TnE  PARTS  of  speecfi.  21 

to  denote  a  colour,  they  are    abstract;    iikataso,    coverhuj,    may    de- 
note the  action  of  covering  (abstract)  or  a  cocerinr/  thing  (concrete). 
In  the  following  sentences:  1.  obo  n'akyi,  he  strikes  his  hacl:-, 

2.  ogyina  n'akyi,  he  stands  behind  him, 

3.  ode  n'akyi  gyaw  ne  mm  a,  he  leaves  his  property  to  his  eJiddrcn, 

4.  nna  no  akyi  oko  bae,  after  those  days  a  war  arose, 

the  word  akyi  means   1.  a  thing  (a  distinct  part  of  a  human  body); 

2.  a  place  (a  part  of  the  space  contiguous  to  a  human  body) ; 

3.  a  collection  of  things  left  in  the  back  i.  e.  at  the  departure  or  death 
of  a  person;  4.  a  time  (indicated  in  Engl,   by  a  j) reposition). 

In    ].  neho  ye  fe,  lie  (\\t.  his  outside)  is  handsome, 

2.  ne  ho  ye  den,  he  (his  body)  is  strong, 

3.  ote  nenua  ho,  he  sits  near  his  brother, 

4.  o  dwell  ne  nua  ho,  Jie  thinlcs  of  his  brother, 

the  word  ho  means  3.  the  visible  part  of  a  body:  2.  the  body  itself; 
3.  a  place  close  to  a  body  ;  4.  the  things  concerning  somebody  ,  or, 
the  relation   of  an   action   to  an  object.   Cf.  §  llS.  111). 

STIiUCTUEE  OF  NOUNS. 

34.  In  the  structure  of  nouns    we  have  to  distinguish 

1.  the  stem,  which  is  either  simple  (§  28,  3)  or  reduplicated  (§  21',  4) 
or  compound  (§  30.  30): 

2.  t\iG p)rcf(X,  which  to  a  certain  degree  indicates  tlie  class  of  things  (§  35). 

3.  The  stem   may  also  include  a  suffix,   which  likewise  denotes  some 

class  of  things.  (§  36 — 38.) 

The  pimple  and  rednplicatprl  strms  do  not  want  to  be  treated  of  soimrately. 
Uut  we  are  now  to  speak  of  the  various  prefixes  and  svffixefi  used  in  thi-  for- 
mation of  nouns,  aiul  the  classes  of  tliino-s  indicated  by  them  (§35 — 38),  where- 
ii|)ou  the  componnd  nouns  will  he  classified  and  explained  (§  39).  and  then  the 
various  (ones  and  accents  of  nouns,  especially  of  their  sterns,  must  ])h  staled 
(§40)  before  the  changes  of  nouns  in  the  connected  form  (§49)  can  l)e  co   sidered. 

•The  Prefixes  of  Nouns. 

35.  The pjrefixes,  by  which  most  nouns  are  formed"),  are  as  follows: 
1.  labial:  o,  o;     2.  guttural:  a,   a;     3.  nasal:  m,  n,   h; 

4.  palatal:  e,  e ;  5.  componnd:  am,  an,  an. 
For  brevity's  sake  we  shall  call  them:  the  prefix  g,  a,  m,  e,  am. 
1.  The  prefix  o  is  chiefly  used  in  names  oi p)<'fSoyis{f)  and  animals  (''), 
seldom  in  names  of  single  inanimate  things  ('^)    and  materials  (''),   but 
often  in   abstract  nouns  ('^'),   especially  infinitives  (§  104,  1). 
<l.  onipa,  a  man  (human  being):    gbarima,   obea,   okunu,  oyerc, 
gba,  onua,  oygfiko,  owura,  ghene,   op  any  in,  see  §  41 .  42.  38. 
h.  gsebg,  a  leopard:  gpgnkg,  a  horse;  okisi,  a  rat;  opete,  a  vulture- 

c.  otuo,  a  gun;  gprae,  a  broom:  gsckan,  a  Jcnifc;  gbo,  a  stone. 

d.  ode,  ijam;  gtg,  mashed  yam;  ohn,  a  Jdnd  of  imp;  osu,  rain, 
c.  ohia,  poverty;  gkgm,  hunger'  gwaw,  cough '.i  own,  death. 


*)  Cf.  Riis'  Grammatical  Outline  &c.  §  22—31,  espec.  on  the  notional  variations  indicate<' 
by  the  "augments",  as  he  calls  these  pretixes. 


22  ETYMOLOGY.  §  35. 

2.  The  prefix  'a'  is  also  used  in  names  of  persons  (•'^)  and  animals  (''), 
l)ut  chiefly  in  names  of  indlvidnal  ihin(js{^')  sometimes  in  names  of 
materials  ('')  and  in  abstract  nouns  (^). 

a.  aj^"ya,  akoa,  akora,  aberante,  aberewa,  afjinji,  abofra,  §  40. 
h.  aboa,   apata   (§42,2);    akura,  a  mouse;  agyinamoa,  a  cat. 

c.  a  be,  a  i)(dutfree\  ab  en,  rt //o>"»  ;  af  oa,  a  s»y>;y?;  akyene,  a  drum; 
akyi,  the  back\  ani,  an  cijc;  a,  no,   ilie  iiioiifJi  ]  a  \v  i  a,  flic  sun. 

d.  aboil,   harJc]  aliai,   hcer]  ahuru,  foam,  froth]  amane,   rcsin\ 
asra,  snuff \  a  \v i,  n>eal,  flour:,  aburow',  corn;  ad  nan',  food. 

e.  aboro,   injur//]  afere,  sJtamc]    agoru,  j)?a_^;  awi,  theft. 

'.].  The  prefix  m  is  used  in  names  of  materials  (collective  masses)  {"■), 
in  names  of  single  things  that  are  viewed  as  collcclive  multitudes  ('') 
or  consist  of  several  parts  (*^),   and   in  abstract  nouns  (''). 

a.  11  h  w  e  a,  sand ;  n  k  w  a  ti ,  soup  ;  n  k  y  e  n  e,  salt ;  n  s  u,  water ;  n  s  6,  ashes. 

b.  mfote,  iikrarV,  ntetea,   different  Icinds  of  ants \ 

n  h  w  1,  hair ;  h  h  i  li,  a  root ;  n  t  i  n  i,  a  bloodvessel ;  n  s  o  r  o  m  a,  a  star ; 
n  tram  a,  cowries]  m-p  cte,  smallpox. 

c.  us  a,  the  hand;  nsenia,    a  pair  of  sccdes. 

d.  nkae,  memorij]  nkae,  remnant]  nsew,  a  curse;  ntam,  a)i  oath. 

4.  The  prefix  c  has  no  decided  character  and  is  chiefly  used  before 
nouns   with   simple  stems  that  have  no  other  prefix. 

cko,  a  bujfalo]  esono,  an  elephant;  edom,  an  armij] 
ese,  a  tooth]  eti,  the  head;  epo,  the  sea;  edin,  a  name. 

5.  'J'he  prefix  am  occurs  seldom,  and  appears  in  some  cases  as  a 
variation  of  the  prefix  'a'. 

am  pan'  Ak.   apane,  a  bat]   ansam'   Ak.  asam',  a  (juinea-hen; 

ampesi  Ak.  apesie,  boiled  plantains]  antweri,  a  ladder. 

* 

Hemarhs  1.  Many  nouns,  especially  compounds  of  two  and  more 
syllables  and  exotics,  have  no  prefix  at  all. 

2.  The  prefix  g  is  usually  dropped  in  connection  with  preceding 
words  that  do  not  end  in  open  vowels  (a,  e,  g);  cf.  §  40,  1. 

It  is  not  nuu'.h  used  in  the  Faiite  dialect  of  Cajje  Coast.  The  -Mfantsi  Gram- 
mar hi/  D.  L.  Carr  and  J.  F.  Brown''  lias  it  in  nouns  of  persons  only  in  a 
few  iiistauces.  replaces  it  in  other  nouns  by  c,  ami  ascribes  it  (on  page  G7) 
only  to  the  dialect  of  Gomua  and  thereabouts,  where  »it  is  made  use  of  to 
comiirehend  all  the  vowel  augments*  (?). 

o.  The  prefix  e  is  still  more  easily  dropped  than  the  prefix  g,  and 
is  chiefly  used  when  the  word  stands  independent,  c.  g.  at  the  head 
of  a  sentence. 

Some  individuals  use  it  in  this  case  even  before  the  prefix  m,  in 
order  to   make  this  nasal  prefix  more  distinctly  heard. 

■i.  1"he  prefixes  a,  m,  am,   are  not  dropped  like  g  and  e. 

5.  On  the  prefixes  in  the  plural,  see  §42,  1.  2. 


§  36.  37.  THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  23 

The  Stiffixes  of  Nouns. 

3C  The  palatal  suffix  (§  29,  3)  enlarges  the  hist  vowel  of  llic 
stem  into  a  long  vowel  or  diphthong,  or,  with  a  final  consonant  (if 
the  stem,  forms  a  new  syllable.  —  It  is  used,  together  with  ])rclixcs 
or  without  such,  to  form  nouns  from  verbs,  either  simple,  or  conijioun- 
ded  with  the  subject  or  object  of  the  action  expressed  by  the  verb. 

The  nouns  thus  derived  fall   under  several  classes.  'J'hey  denote 

1.  the  agent  or  instrument  of  the  action: 

tui,  a  brush]  fitae,  a  fan;  oprae,  a  broom :,  sone,  a  strainer] 
from  tu,  to  brush,   fita,  to  fan.,  pi' a,  to  sweep.,  son  so,  to  strain] 

onCfoe,  a  benevolent  j^erson]   from    fow,    to  moisten,    a  no,  niontli] 
lit.  one  who  moistens  (makes  fat)  another's  mouth; 

ofarebae,  an  author.,  inventor;  from  fa,  to  take,  ba.  to  come: 
lit  one  tvho  tooh  (or  found  out  e.  g.  a  song  or  play)  and  came  with  it. 

akasae,  a  tingling  instrument]  from  kasa,  to  .speak,  talk. 

2.  the  action  itself,    especially   repjeated   action,    manner  of  action,  or 
a  state  or  qualitg  as  the  result  of  action  (abstract) : 

nkasae,  tcdking;  mfonee,  loathing,  from  fono,  to  loathe; 
nneyee,  doings,  fr.  ade,  thing,  ye,  to  do; 
h  o  a  e,  whiteness,  fr.  h  o  a,  to  be  white. 

3.  the  thing  produced  by  the  action,  or  reduced  by  it  to  a  certain  state 
(concrete) : 

mpomponee,  wrinkles,  fr.  p  o n o,  to  bend,  p o m p o  n o,  to  wrinkle ; 

mfrafrae,  a  mixture,    fr.  fra,  to  mix; 

nan  ho  we,  dried  meat,  fr.  njim,  meat,  how,  to  drg. 

4.  the  jjZrtce  of  action: 

a  n  0  m  e',  drinking-plaee ;  a  s  o  e  e,  restiyig-plaee ,"  m  m  e  ii  e,  neighbourhood. 

5.  the  time  of  action  : 

adekyee,    adesae,    akokobgne,  owigyinae,  §  39,  5c. 

Hem.  On  the  low  tones  of  such  words,  with  high  tone  only  at  the 
end  and  the  accent  preceding  it,   see  §  40,  4*. 

37.  The  dimimdive  suffix,  originally  b  a,  equal  to  the  noun  oba, 
child,  is  wa;  when  joined  to  final  m  or  li,  it  is  ma;  when  joined  to 
a  final  'a',  sometimes  als  to  e  or  o,  it  is  contracted  with  these  vowels 
into  ;i.  §  20,  4.  It  has  usually  high  tone;  preceding  syllables  often 
assume  low  tone. 

The  diminutive  noun,  formed  from  another  noun  by  the  additiini 
of  this  suffix,  sometimes  assumes  the  prefix  'a' ;  in  some  cases  redu- 
plication of  the  original  word  takes  place.  (Of.  Kiis  §  36.  37.) 

The  diminutive  suffix  denotes: 

1.  relative  littleness,  or  smallness  in  general,  perhaps  with  some  other 
change  of  meaning  compared  with  the  original  word. 


24  p:TYM()L()(iY.  §  38. 

Ix'powa,  a  small  monntain,  a  7/ilJ.         from  1i  t'pow,  a  monnialn; 

jiljoawa,  aboji,  a  small  animal,  -  a  bo  a,  nn  animal; 

akwacwa,  underwood,  bushes,  -  Qkw -av,  a  icood,  forest ; 

all  ye  mm  a,  a  boat,  -  eh  yen,  a  ship; 

a  do  mm  a,  nngnnoma,  a  small  bcU,  -  edoi'i,  a  bell,  cloeJc; 

(111 a',  a  shnd),  a  s)nall  piece  of  wood,  -  edua,  a  free;  wood; 

ka,  kawa,  ((  rinff.  toTi',   a  small  box,  -  to  a,  a   box] 

d  a  d e w  a,  a  nail ;  d  a  r  e  w  a,  a  fishin(j-hooJi,  -  dad  e,  iron ; 

abas  a',  a  ivilhercd  arm,  -  basa,   a}/  arm; 

aniwa,  an  c/je;  niwa,  a  single  cowrij.  -  aiii,  an  e^je,  face. 

2.  jioufhful  (if/c  and  old  a[/r: 

a  b  a  r  i  m  a  w  ;i,  a  b  o  i*  a  n  t  e  \v  ;i ,   a  k  ^^•  a  I'l  k  ^\'  a' ,   a  b  u  a  w  a ,   a  b  a  b  a'  tSic . 
a  k  w  a  k  0  r  a ,   a  b  e  r  e  w  a,  —  sec  §  4 1 .  1 . 

3.  the  female  sex : 

a  t  a,  a  w  n  r  a',  o  k  r  a',   a  b  o  r  a'.   K  w  a  k  y  c  \v  a  &c.  —  see    §  4 1 ,3-5. 

4.  Some  nonns  assume  the  diminutive  suffix  in  tlie  plural  form,  §-J2,4. 

as.  The  jiersonal  suffixes  ni  (F.  nyi),  used  only  in  the  sing,  num- 
ber, and  fo  (Ak.  foo),  used  in  the  sing-,  and  jjlur.  numbers  (§  42,  3.  4) 
are  originally  independent  nouns,  meaning  person,  people,  but  are  so 
frequently,  and  almost  exclusively,  used  in  composition,  in  order  to 
form  personal  nouns,  that  we  may   well  call   them  suffixes. 

1.  When  personal  nouns  art^  fornu'd  from  verbs,  or  rather  from, 
their  infinitives,  frequently  compounded  with  their  objects,  the  usual 
suffix  in  the  singular  is  fo,  yet  the  other  (ni)  is  also  found  in  some 
cases. 

The  verbs  are  most  frequently  taken  in  an   active  sense: 

okyerewfo,  a   writer,  from  Icyerew,  iu  write; 
otomfo,  a  smith,                   -  tono,  fo  forge; 
gtamfo,  an  enemg,              -  tan,  fo  hate; 
0  s  u  a  11  i,  a  scholar.               -  s  li  a,  to  learn : 
oguadini,  a  trader,            ■  digua,  to  />-rtf?c,  aguadi,  §  30,  .T/j- 
obaiitoiii.  a  mason,           -  to  abaii,  to  build  a  stonehoase ; 
o  t  a  m  a  li  w  e  m  f  6,  a  wearer,  -  h  w  e  ii  e  ii  t  a  m  a,  to   weace  ifulli. 

Sometimes  the  verb  is  taken    in  a  passive  sense: 

osomafo,  ei  person  sent,  a  messenger,  from  soma,  to  so/d; 
opirafo,   a   wounded  person,  -       pira,  to  wound. 

Sometimes  both   the  active  and  the  passive  sense  are   admissible  : 
gdofo,  a  hjring  or  a  beloved  person,  fr.  do,  to  love. 

2.  When  ])ersonal  nouns  are  formed  from  }iamcs  of  countries  and 
places,  the  suffix  in  the  singular  is  always  ni: 

Ohuani,  a  man  from  the  country/  Iltia. 

Okranni,  a  man  from  the  town  or  countrij  Nkraii.  Alcra; 

O  k  ii  r  o  p  o  11  ii  i,  a  man  from  the  town  A k  ii  r  o  p  o  li. 


§   39.  THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  25 

3.  Wlicn  personal  nouns  arc  formed  from  otiier  ahslract  or  concrete 
nouns,  th<!  suffix  in  tbc  singular  is  cither  ni  or  fo. 

osikani,  a  rich  person,  from  s  i  k  a,  (jold; 

gdefn,  a  ivealthy  pctson.,  -  ade,  thinr/s: 

oliiani,  a  poor  person,  -  o\\\k,  poveriij  \ 

oh nsuiini,  a  relation,  Jcinsman.  -  abusfia,  famit//; 

o  b  us  u  f  6,  a  mischievous  person ,  -  m  m  u  s  u,  mischief: 

obantanni,  a  proud  man,  -  a  ban  tan,  pride; 

o^oxitom\)o\\\.,  a  calum)ii(dor,  •  nkontompo,  calumny; 

otorofo,  a  liar,  -  atoro,   a  lie. 

The  prefix  a  or  m  of  tbc  original  word  is  excbanged  for  tbe  per- 
sonal prefix  o,  as  we  see  in  several  of  these  examples  *  yet  there  are 
exceptions,  e.  g. 

mmarabyefo,  a  lawgiver,       from  bye  mmara.  to  rjive  a  laic; 
nkomhyefo,  a  soothsayer,  -       bye  nkom,  to  soothsay; 

m  p  0  fi  n  6  n  i,  a  man  from  the  coast,  -      m  p  o  a  n  6,  the  sea-coast. 

Sometimes  the   original   word   is  reduced  to   a  shortened  form  : 

otufo,  a  musketeer,  from  otiio,  a  yun ; 

okui'o^a  vianfuUof  soresa)id  icou>ids,     -     ekuru,  a  sore; 
oninkufo,  a  jealous  man,  -     n  i  hkunu,  _;e«Zo«6v/; 

g  n  o  k  w  a  f  6,  a  tndhful  man ,  -     n  o k  w  a  r  e,  truth. 

Hem.  1.  The  relation  of  the  original  word  to  tbe  person  may  br 
as  different  as  that  of  a  noun   in  the  possessive   case,  cf.  §  193. 

2.  The  tones  of  the  personal   suffix   and  of  the  syllables  preceding 
it  present  a  great  variety ;   e.  g. 
qhhio,  a  htinter,  gbgfo,  a  creator,  gbgfo,  «  messewr/er  (§  40,  4.  7.  9). 

Compound  Nouns. 

39.  In  genuine  compound  nouns  we  distinguish  the  fundamental 
and  tbe  quaiifyiny  compionent  reach  of  which  may  be  a  simple  word, 
or  itself  a  compound,  as  will  be  shown  under  8).  The  former,  always 
a  noun,  expresses  a  general  notion  which  is  particularized  by  tbe 
latter,  so  that  the  compound  denotes  a  particular  kind  of  tbe  tiling 
denoted  by  its  fundamental  word. 

Spurious  compounds  are  also  made  up  of  two  or  more  word^^,  but 
none  of  them  expresses  tbe  genus  of  tbe  thing  of  wliicli  llic  wliob; 
compound  denotes  a  species ;  such  a  compound,  as  it  were,  occupies 
tbe  place  of  tbe  qualifying  word,  and  tbe  general  notion  (person  or 
animal,  or  thing)  is  left  to  be  supplied.  — 

We  make  ten  classes  of  compounds;  in  1.  2.  6.  7.  the  qualifying 
component  succeeds,  and  in  3-5.  it  precedes,  tbe  fundamental  part: 
in  8.  we  have  combinations  of  tbe  cases  in  1-7,  and  9.  10.  contain 
spurious  compounds. 


26  ETYMOLOGY-  §  39. 


1.  Compounds  of  a  xoun  and  an  adjective. 

adebonc,   bad  thlng^  i.  c.  evil;  gponkesc,  great  door,  i.  v.ijatc; 
ayeforo,  §  30,  1.  o  hem  pa...,  §  51.  ohcmforo,  §  70,2. 

Some  adjectives,  e.  g.  pon,  la) gv,  or  certain  forms  of  adjectives,  and 
some  verbal  adjectives  (§09,  2d)   are  only  used  in  composition: 

d  u  p  o  n  =  d  u  a  k  e  s  e,  a  large  tree ;  d  u  w  u  i  =  d  u  a  a  e  w  u  i,.  a  dead  tree. 

o  se  n  nail  o  =  a  sem  a  eda  ho,  a  irrceedeneei  an  example', 

a  n  ho  niagu  aii  =^  n  hom  a  a  aguan,  a  dr/j  or  tvdhcred  sJchli  hide. 

lien/.  To  this  class  of  compounds  we  reckon  also  the  words  babi, 
da  ben,  da  hi  (§  60,  3.  4.),  and  the  nouns  compounded  with  numerals 
(§  80),  though  the  latter  might  also  be  taken  to  class  2  or  3. 

2.  Compounds  of  a  noun  and  an  apposUive  noun. 

The  qualifying  component  is  a  noun  in  apposition,  as:  o  b  a  r  i  m  a, 
obca,  onini,  obere  (§  41,  1),  otan,  osae,  nta,  or  some  other  com- 
pound or   derivative  personal  noun. 

0  b  abjir  im  a...  §41,  2.   obanintan,   a  vian  that  has  children^ 
o  b  a  t  a  n,  a  woman  that  has  chUdren ;  o  k  o  k  g  t  a  n,  a  hen  that  has  chiclccns; 
oguansae,  a  tvether;  gpgnkgsae,  a  castrated  horse,  gelding. 
ntuta,  a  double-harelled  gun;  nkwant-A,  a  crosstcag;  (fr.  oti'io,  gkwan). 
g  so  fop  any  in,  a  highpriest;  gbahuhuui,  a  worthless  fellow  \ 
gbanyausafo,  gbadwemma,  a  wise,  prudent  person. 

Hem.  The  diminutives  (§  37)  originally  belong  to  tins  class. 

3.  Compounds  of  a  noun  with  an  attributive  nOun  in  the  possessive 
case  before  it. 

a.  Both   components  are  concrete,   sometimes  abstract,   nouns. 

g  h  e  n e  b a,  a  hing''s  son,  prince ;  a h em fi,  tlic  king's  house,  court,  palace; 

from  ghene,  a  king ;  gba,  a  child:,  ofi,  a  dwelling,  home,  residence. 
asohhoma,  an  elephant's  hide;  asommen,  asonse,  ivory; 

fr.  esono,  an  elephant,  n  horn  a,  a  skin,  aben,  a  horn,  cse,  a  tooth. 

l\em.  Among  the  qualifying  components  we  notice  the  word  borg 
or  biiro  (§17,6)  which  is  not  used  as  an  independent  noun  and 
marks  the  thing  named  by  the  fundamental  component  as  coming  from 
Europe  or  the  Europeans. 

aborgnoma,  a  pigeon;  abtirogua,  a  chair  tvith  a  back; 

mmorgsa,  rum,  brandy ;  mmuronrio,  olive-oil,  sweet-oil; 

from  anoma,  a  bird;  agua,  a  seat;  nsa,  strong  drink;  hho,  oil. 

b.  The  qualifying  component  is  a  verb;  on  dissolving  such  com- 
pounds  the  verb  must  be  rendered  by  an   adjective  sentence. 

atuboa^aboa  a  otu,  an  animal  which  flies,  a  bird,  a  bat  de.; 
twabo,  a  touchstone,  =gbo  a  wgde  twa  sika  fwe,  a  stone  by  which 
gold  is  tried;  susudua,  a  measure,  =dua  a  wgde  susuw   ade, 
a  stick  which  they  take  and  measure  things. 


§  39.  EUPHONY.  27 

Bern.  1.     Among   the   fundamental    components  of  3  a.  b.,    to   wliieli 
also  the  personal   suffixes  §  oH.  originally  belong,    we  notice  as  very 
frequent    the  words    ade    (a dee),    tliuif/,    asem,    ivord,    thbuj,    iiiatfer, 
the  former  for  concrete,  the  latter  for  abstract  notions,  and  bew,  here, 
be  a,  for  place,  time,  manner. 
ahenne(e),  the  roijal  insir/niae;  aliens  em,  a  king's  dointjs; 
atetede,  a  thing  of  the  old  time;  atetesem,  a  story  of  ancient  times] 
akycde,  a  tiling  presented,  apreseyit;  atesem,  a  ivord  heard,  hearsaij: 
dabew,   dab  ere,  a  place  to  lie  on;  trabere,  trabea,  a  pAace  to  sit; 
tebea,  state,  condition;  yebea,  manner  of  doing. 
Mem.  2.    Among  the  compounds  in   3  h.   we   may  reckon   the   infini- 
tives compounded  with  ye  and  na,  §  105,  5. 

c.  'i'he  fundamental  word  is  a  noun  of  place  and  relation,  §  118,  and 
the  whole  compound  a  noun  of  place,  sometimes  of  time  or  manner, 
or  a  concrete  noun. 

sarem"  (serem),  sareso  (seresoo),  a  prairie,  steppe,  wilderness; 
fr.  sare  Ak.  sere,  a  sort  of  grass  (lit.  i)i  or  on  the  grass); 

afiase,  the  under  part  of  a  dwelling,   a  store-house,  cellar,  prison ; 

mfikyiri,  the  place  behind  the  dwelling;  fr.  ofi,  a  home; 

mmofraase,  childhood;  fr.  abofra,  a  child. 

an6m\  the  inner  pi^ris  of  the  mouth;  asom',  do.  of  the  ear; 

nsam",  n  say  am",  the  palm  of  the  hand; 

yam\  the  cavity  and  contents  of  the  chest  and  belly; 

mpoano,  the  sea-shore,  fr.  epo,  sea,  and  a  no,  border; 

usanoa  =  sare  ano  noli  6  a,  the  border  of  the  steppe. 

4.  Compound  nouns  of  quality,  made  from  the  subject  and  the  pre- 
dicative adjective  of  certain  sentences,  the  latter  being  turned  into  a 
noim,  and  the  former  qualifying  it  as  an  cdtribide  in  the  piossessive  case. 

ahogfe,  beaidy,  fr.  ne  ho  ye  fe,  he  (lit.  his  outside,  body)  is  fine; 
asooden,  disobedience,  fr.  n'aso  ye  den,  lit.  his  ear  is  hard; 
aboodeh,  dearness,  high  price,  fr.  ebo  ye  den,  lit.  (its)  stone  is  hard. 

5.  Compounds  made  from  an  infinitive  or  another  verbal  noun,  as 
the  fundamental  component,  and  the  subject  or  any  complement  of  the 
corresponding  verb,  as  the  qualifying  component,  equal  to  an  attribute 
in  the  possessive  case. 

a.  Infinitives  or  other  verbal  nouns  of  intransitive  verbal  phrases 
with  a  specific  subject.     Cf.  §  105,  4. 

ah  op  op  6,  trembling;  aniwu,  shame;  ay  amy  e,  liberality. 

b.  Verbal  nouns  of  such  phrases,   formed  by  the  palatal  suffix. 

a  s  o  m  d  w  o  e  e,  a  h  o  d  \v  o  e  e  (=ahod wo^,  peace ;  a n  i  f  u  r  a  e,   blindness. 

c.  Verbal  nouns  of  other  sentences,   denoting  a  time, 
adekyee,  day-break,  day-light,  adesae,  evening,  night, 

fr.  adekye,  the  things  appear,  ade  sa,  the  things  come  to  an  end; 
akokobone,  cocJc-croiv;  awiapuei,  sunrise;  owigyinae,  noon, 
fr. owia  agyina,  the  sun  has  stopped,  attained  its  highest  stand. 


28  ETYMOLOGY.  §  39. 


<l.   Infinitives  of  intransitive    verbs    witli    a   nominative   coniplenient. 
keseye,  heing  or  becoming  great:  o  nip  aye,  being  <i  nxoi. 

e.  Infinitives  &c.  of  verbal  phrases  with  a  specific  object  or  other 
cotnplement. 

ahope,  .■^elf-locc]  aniyiyf,  neglect:  asotwe,   pnnishnient. 

f.  Infinitives  &c.  of  verbs  with  a  passive  or  resultive  object  or  a 
specific   complement. 

aguadi,  trading;  duouto,  singing  \  asjibow,  drnnkenneas. 

g.  Infinitives  &.c.  of  verbs  (verbal  phrases)  with  locatiA^e  comjilements. 
asefi,  asehye,  beginning  ■.  ^  noho a,  gafJiering:  anidan,  atlcnilion: 
a n i  m  k  a.   reprimand \   a  n  a  n  m  u  h  y  e,   restoration . 

Bcni.  This  formation  is  limited  to  nouns  of  place  having  the  pre- 
fix  'a',    and  even  with   them   the  formation   61).   is   more  frequent. 

G.  (Jom pounds  like  those  in  5  f.  ;/.,  but  in  which  the  infinitive  comes 
first  and  the  conqjlemcnt  follows. 

a.  =  5/'.  Exceptional  formations  of  rare  occurence. 

nim  dee=  adenim,  hnoicledgc  (of  things),  intelligence:, 
a  h  fi  m  0  b  g  ( r  e)  :^  m  m  g  b  0  r  0  h  n  n  u,  commiseration. 

b.  =  ')g.   Verbal  nouns  formed  by  the  nasal  prefix. 

mfiase,   mfitiase,  hhyease,  mmgase,  beginning; 

nhyeso,  oppression. \  mmoaauo,  gathering:, 

n  n  a  h  ani,  perversion:^  li  kaau  ini,   reproae]iing\ 

h  h  y  c  a  n  a  n  m  u,  compensation ;  h  k  e  k  a  h  (3,  addition . 
Rem.  Several  compoixnds  of  tliis  kind   denote  not  only  actions,   but 
also  concrete  objects  and  means    of   action:   in  this  case  they  belong- 
to  the  9tli  class. 

7.  Compounds  of  tivo  verbs  turned  into  nouns,  either  real  infinitives 
(§  105)  or  verbal  nouns  denoting  actions.  In  these  compounds  the 
two  parts  may  be  considered  as  co-ordinate,  or,  the  second  as  an 
apposition  to  the  first,  as  in   class  2. 

stifre,  Kcejiing  connected  with  calling,  i.e.  imploring'., 
g  dad  wen,   lying  and  thinhing,  i.e.  meditation; 
aforosiari,  ascending  and  descending,  going  up  and  doicn. 
abuada  (mm—),  fasting,  fr.  bua,  /ocOrer  (the  food)  and  dfi^to  slee}^- 
rikogu,  a  fighting  and  prostrating,  i.  e.  defeat. 

8.  Tirofold  or  manifold  genuine  compounds  are  such,  in  which  either 
the  qualifying  or  the  fundamental  component  or   both  ;ire  compound. 

Hem.  1.  They  do  not,  however,  form  an  own  class,  but  belong  to 
any  one  of  the  preceding  classes.  In  the  following  examples  we  se- 
parate the  two  components  by  a  short  line  and  indicate  the  class  of 
the  whole  compound  by  its  figure  (1  to  7),  adding  in  parenthesis  the 
class  or  classes  to  which  the  single  component,  when  viewed  as  a 
word  by  itself,  would  belong. 


§  39.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  29 

(3)1  osafohen-kama,  an  uncle r-oft leer,  siihaUcrn  officer:, 

3(l)asu-bonten,a  river  (nsu,  tvater,  abonteii  =  boron  tenten ,  a  si  reel  )\ 
(3.1)3  asubontefi -ano,  the  hank  of  a  river-, 

(1)3  ogiiante  11 -hom  a,  a  sheep-sJmr, 
(1,3)3  0  guantenhOm  a-hyefo,  a  dresser  of  sheep-shins,  a  tatver; 
(1)3(1)  abgnteu-nampan,  a  house  icith  an  open  front  toivards  tlic 

(1)5  ayeforo-hyia,  a  netv-wife's  meet  in  fj  i.  e.  a  weddincj.     [street. 
5(5  (/)  bo-aseto,   /  2)aiiencc,  fr.  otg  ue  bo  ase,  lit.  he  piids  his  Jirart 

5(6)  abo-toase,i   doicn,  sets  it  at  rest,  i.  e.  he  is  patient \ 
aui-daso,  hope,  fr.  u'ani  da.. so,  his  eijc  rests  on..\ 
(3)5(6)  anim-guase,  shame.,  confusion]   \   fr.  n'anim   gu  ase, 
(3.5.6)3  animguase-de,  disgraceful  acts\\   lit.  his  face  falls  doirn\ 
5(6.3)  abo-toyani,  satisfaction,  contentment.,  heart's  ease; 

5(7)  abo-dwokyere,  long  suffering]  fr.  ne  bo  dwo  kye; 
5(7.6)  aliome-tetraso,  excessive  trouble  (ahometew   a  etra  so); 

7(6)  mfakTiho,  addition:,  mmotohg,  postponement. 

Hem.  2.  Ill  woko  an  a  kr  ami  a,  tfietj  go  to  sleep  ivith  vcUediction 
for  sleeping,  i.  e.  theg  are  on  friendlg  terms  tuith  eacfi  otJier,  we  have 
three  verbs  combined.  —  In  apeseinadi  the  verbal  noun  pe  has 
its  object  s  em  =  as  em  (as  in  el.  6)  and  besides,  a  dependent  verb  in 
the  consecutive  form  (adi):  lit.  liking  a  palaver  to  settle,  i.e.  litigious 
disposition,  intermeddling.  —  In  apese(ue)  nkony  a  the  verbal  noun 
pe  has  for  its  object  a  noun-sentence  introduced  by  the  conj.  se:  lit. 
a  liking  that  (Itr)  alo)ie  gets,  i.  e.  selfishness,  greediness. 

9.  Spurious  compounds  from  adjccfice  sentences  of  which  some  mem- 
ber or  members  are  omitted.  The  remaining  parts,  united  in  the 
compound,   are  : 

a.  an  attribute  of  the  subject,   and  the  verb  : 
ahk6nam=^nea  ne  hko  nam,  one  ivlio  ivalks  alone.,  a  lone  traveller. 

b.  a  verb  (active  or  causative),  and  its  object  or  locativ-e  coni})lemeiit : 
gboadee:=neH  gbgo  adec,   he  iclio  created  ilie  things  i.e.  the  creator. 
gtvveasee,  aboa  a  gtvve  neho  ase,  a  beast  sneaking  on  tJie  ground,  s)iakc. 
bonsu  (aboa  a  gbg  nsu  gu,  the  beast  tltat  spurts  water)  a  wJiale. 
agyehkwa.  (nea  ogye  nkwa,  lie  ivho  preserves  life)  a  saviour. 

;ib  on  ua  (ade  a  wgde  bg  nnua,  the  thing  wifJt  ivJiicJitJieg  strike  trees)  an  axe. 
Amosu  (nea  gma  osu,  lie  toho  gives  rain),  the  Rain-giver  (God). 
ankgbea  (asafo  a  wghkg  babi),   tJie  king's  body-guard. 
gdaso  (ade  a  eda  so,  a  thing  hjing  above)  a  coverlet; 
abotiri  (ade  a  ebg  tiri)   a  diadem;  abgso,   abomii,  a  belt. 

A  great  number  of  compound  verbal  noiins  are  equal  to  infinitives 
in  form,   but  denote  concrete  things  (cf.  above  6  b.  Hem.): 

h  kye  ky  ere  mil  (ade  a   wgde  kyekyere   won  mu),  a  belt,  girdle] 
iikataso,   nnuraho,   covering,  a  cover]  mmuano,   a  seam. 

c.  two  verbs: 

nnikae  (ne;i   wodii   ma   ekae),   thijif/slc/t  uncatoi,  remains; 
ntndii   fade   a    woto   dii)   lliiugs  Ixnigld  and  cati-n.  i.e.   expenses. 


30  ETYMOLOGY.  §  40. 

nfiriliyia  (ebcre  a  efi  byia,  a  time  tchicJi  goes  forth  and  meets),  a  pear. 
obac.anko  (nca  gbae  a  waiiko  bio),  one  tvho  came  and  did  no  more  (jo. 

d.  an  adjective  sentence  preceded  by  a  subordinate  adverbial  sentence: 
anseeyi   (gsekaii  a  woansew  a  eyi,  a  Jcnifc  which,  though  you  have  not 

shar2iened  it,  takes  off),  a  razor. 
tease(a)enam   (ade  a  wote  ase  a,  enani,  a  thing  trhich  moves  while  you 

are  sitting),  a  carriage. 

c.  tbe  object  of  an   adjective  sentence: 
on  anion  tent  en  (nea  owo  on.,  one  that  takes  long  deps),  a  long-shanks. 

10.  Sjnirions  compounds,  consisting  of  (or  containing)  compjlete  (impe- 
rative) sentences,  used  in  peculiar  phrases. 

0 ni a  no  h y  e d e n,  he  gives  (i.  e.  tells)  him :  he-strong,  i.  e.  he  condoles  him. 

Waye  kofabera,  lie  has  grown  (to  an  age  in  which  he  can  he  told:) 

go  take  (it)  come,  i.  e.  as  it  were,  a  fetch-something. 

Ehg  ye  krabefwe,  there  is  such  a  marvel  that  it  makes  one  send  ivord 

to  others  (kra),  saying:  come  and  look! 

The  sentence  twe  mil  mentwe,  draiv  that  I  may  draiv,  i.  e.  do  what 
you  please,  and  let  me  do  ivhat  I  please,  has  been  made  tlie  qualifying 
component  of  a  genuine  compound  in  '  W  o  d  i  t  \v  e  m  am  e  n  t  \v  e  d  e,  they 
arc  disunited,  at  variance.' 

Tone  and  Accent  of  Nouns. 

40,  Concerning  the  various  tones  and  accents  of  nouns,  we  notice 
first,  that  in  the  independent  form  the  jjrcfx  has  usually  low  tone 
without  stress;  and  with  regard  to  the  tones  and  stress  of  the  stem, 
we  arrange  them  under  the  following   12  classes. 

A.    Stems  beginning  with  low  tone. 

1.  Stems   with  lotv  tone  thronghoid,  of  1   to  5  syllables  : 

epo,   wofa,  adamfo,   kontromfi,    abobonua,    ky  ereben  kuku. 

2.  Stems  with  low  tone  throughout,  leaving  the  principal  accent  to 
the  prefix :  a b  o  g y  e,  o  n  o  k  6. 

The  prefix  has  high  tone  in 

adesa,  amara  (amona),  A'b^  (F.  =  Ayaba?  Ak.  Yav,,i,  Al;j!.  Ya). 

3.  Stems  with  loiv  and  Idgh  tone,  of  2 — G  syllables;  the  accent 
coincides  with  the  high  tone  on  the  last  syllable  or  on  the  last  but 
one  (seldom  the  last  but  two). 

akoa,  abcrewd,*  abotokura,  a  k  y  erekyerckwan; 
ghahini,  gsafohene,  ahcnni  aky  i  r  i ;    gsafohenk  f'l  nini. 

*  Most  diminutives  endin"-  in   wa  have  such   tones. 


§  40.  THE   PARTS  OF   SPEECH.  31 

4.  Ditto  of  1 — 5  syllables,  with  tlie  stress  immediately  before  tlie 
(first)  high  tone. 

k  fi',  ank;!*,   hkae'^,  onua,   awura'-,   odesjini,   awurakwa', 
agyinamoa;   akwadsvcro,   wofiisewa,  nkonso  n  konso  n, 
o  s  a  f  0  h  e  m  p  a  n  y  i  n  ;  d  o  m  p  o  n  i  n  i. 

In  some  few  words  tiie  prefix  has  high  tone  and  a  decided   accent: 
ako',   ansam',   aferaw',  ankora. 

*  Most  diminutives  ending  in  a,  and  nouns  formed  by  the  palatal 
suffix  and  ending  in  e,  i,  ae,  ai,  ee,  oe,  oi,  ui,  have  the  stress  on 
the  first  part  of  these  long  vowels  and  diphthongs,  and  end  with  liigh 
tone  on  the  final  part. 

5.  Stems  with  loic,  Itujli  and  middle  (or  low)  tone,  of  2-5  syllables, 
with  the  stress   on   the  first  high  syllable : 

ntata,   abarima,   ohiani,   obosonsomfo,   ak  y  en  ky  e  n  n  I'lr  n. 

6.  Ditto  with  the  accent  immediately  before  the  high  tone: 
opg'do,   obarima,   ok  y  igy  injif  o,  omansoboafo, 

An  addition  to  the  classes  5  and  6  are: 
Stems   with  lotv,  hifjlt,  low,  high  (and  perhaps  again  low)  tones,  of  .3-7 
syllables,  in  which   two  of  the  preceding  cases   1-6   are  combined: 
mfinimfini,  asepatere,  k  was  iaman  kw  a',  nh  wean  h  w  eabo. 
B.    Stems  beginning  with  high  tone. 

7.  Stems  with  high  tone  throughout,  of  1-4  syllables, 
with  the  accent  on  the  first  syllable  : 

aba,  oba,  agya,   o  b  e  a,  obdbea,  akokonini. 

In  nouns  consisting  of  a  prefix  and  a  monosyllabic  stem,  the  latter  lias  so 
regularly  high  tone,  that  it  does  not  want  an  accentual  mark. 

8.  Ditto  with  the  accent  on  the  prefix  : 

a  no,  aboa,  anomraane,  aniberesem. 

9.  Stems  with  high  and  middle  (or  low)  tone,  of  1-5  syllables,  with 
the  principal  accent  on  the  first  high,  and  a  secondary  accent  on 
the  only  or  second   middle-toned  syllable: 

hkae  (rcmemhrance),  ok  ore,  ogyigyefo,  okontomponi, 
obosomak  e  te  w;  owiira,  sirikyi,  mario;    ntetea. 

10.  Ditto  with  the  principal  accent  on  the  prefix  and  a  secondary 
accent  on  the  middle-toned  syllable : 

oka'ra,  okorow,  hkoroh,   abakah. 

11.  Stems  with  higli,  low  and  liigh  tone,  of  .3-5  syllables,  with  the 
principal  accent  on  the  first  high  syllable  and  a  secondary  accent 
on  the  high  syllable  subsequent  to  the  low  tone: 

mf  en  sere,   as  6m  fan  a  or  asonomfoa,   akitereki'i, 
a  k  e  k  a  n  t  \v  e  r  e,   o  p a n  t  w  e  e  n  i  n  i. 


32  ETYMOLOGY.  §  41 . 

12.  Ditto  of  2-4  syllables,   with  accents  on  low  tones,   either 

a.  only  before  the  last  high  tones,  or 

b.  also  before  the   first  high   tone,   i.  e.   on  the   preiix. 

a.  (li'ikiV,  topo',  ma  ho',   pant  ant  we  re. 
h.  ababa',   a  bo  do',   ahohow',  jifofjinto, 

An  addition  to  the  classes  7-12  are: 
Stems   with    liiijli,    loic,    high,    low    (and    perhaps    again  liiijli)  tones,   of 
4-6    syllables,    in    which    two    of   the    cases  7-12  are    combined,    with 
two  principal  accents: 

d  a  b  6  d  a  b  o,   n  s  a  k  y  i  n  s  a  y  a  \\\ ,   a  h  fi  n  a  n  i  a  h  k  ;i  n  s  a. 

Hem.  Stems  with  a  very  short  vowel  before  an  inserted  r  or  n 
followed  by  a  high-toned  vowel,  are  considered  as  beginning  with  a 
high  tone,  though  the  very  short  vowel,  when  not  sup[)ressed,  have, 
rather  low  tone: 

(cl.  7)  obara,   likara,  atoro  (or  obra,   likra,   at(')r()),   ntrania; 
(cl.  V))   [)rako,   hkrirah',   aboronoma,   ii  kii  r('inni'i  a,   aturukiiku. 

i^ENBEll. 
41.  Gender.,  as  the  distinction  of  sex,  is  limited  (in  Tshi  Grammar) 
to  some  common  names  and  proper  names  of  persons,  and,  if  wanted, 
to  names  of  animals. 

1.  'J'he  male  or  female  sex  is  distinguished  by  different  words: 

obarima,  F.  obanyin,  a  man;  obea,  oba,  o(ba)basi;i,  a  '/luiuiav. 

onini,  the  male  of  aniutuls;  obere,  the  female  of  animals. 

a  k  o  r  a,  a  k  w  a  k  o  r  Ti',  an  old  mav  ;  a  b  e  r  e  w a,  an  old  woman. 

aberante,   akwahkwa,  ababa,  abeafo,  a  ijoung  /roman. 

a  young  man; 

a  b  e  1-  a  n  t  e  w  a,   a  b  e  r  a  n  t  e  k  w  a,  a  b  Ti  w  a,  a  ma iden .  lass, 

a  i/onth,  lad\ 

abarimawa,  a  bog;  abeawa,  a  girl. 

akoa,  a  male  slave-,  a  fan  a',   a  female  slave. 

agya,  (Ak.)  ose,  father;  en  a,  oni,  a  wo,  mother. 

oki'inu,  a  husband;  oyere  (Ak.  oye),    a  wife. 

2.  It  is  distinguished  by  compounding  some  of  the  nouns  mentioned 
above  with  iu)uns  of  common   gender  : 

o  b  a  b  a  rim  a,   o  b  a  b  a  n  i  li ,   a  son ;      o  b  :'i  b  a,   o  b  a  b  e  a,   a   daughter. 
onuabarima,   a  brother;  onuabea,   a  sister. 

gpohkonini,  a  stallion;  opohkobere,  a  mare. 

nantwinini,  a  bull;  nantwibere,  a  eou: 

o  d  w  e  n  n  i  n  i,  a  ram  ;  o  g  u  a m  m  e  r  e,  a  eive. 

o  k  6  k  0  n  i  n  i,  a  cock ;  a  k  o  k  o  here,  a  hen. 

oh  one,  a  Icing;  ohemmea,   a  queen. 

Or  such  iK)uns  are  added  in   apposition,   e.  g. 
aljofra,   a   child;  abofra   barim;i,   a  />r;// ;  a  h  ofra  bea,   a  ffirl. 


§  42.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  33 

3.  The  feminine  form  is  distinguished  from  the  masculine  by  adding 
the  diminutive  suffix  to  the  latter,  often  with  an  additional  change 
of  the  pi'efix: 

at  a,  a  male  twin;  at  a',  a  female  twin; 

owura  (Ak.  owira),   master;    awura    (Ak.  auiravva),    mistress; 

ok  fir  a,  a  male  slave.,  gkarti,  a  female  slave, 

destined  to  accompany  the  master  in  death. 
0  b  u  r  6  n  1,  a  European;  a  b  g  r  a  (aborgwa),  a  female  European. 

Of  this  kind  are  some  proper  names  of  persons,  e.  g. 

Kwakye,   Ofori,  Oben;  K waky ewa,  Oforiwa,  Obenewa; 

Koranten  or  Tenkoran;      Korantemma,     Tenkorarama. 

4.  Proper  names  of  persons,  according  to  the  week-day  of  their  birth : 

Mascidine :  Fein  inine  : 

Kwasi;  Akosua  ( Akwasiba),  fr.  K w a s i d a,  Sunday. 

Kw  a  d  w  6,  F.  Kogyo,  A'd  w  6  w  a,  F.Agwewa,  „  D  w  6  d  a,  Monday. 

Kwabena,  F,  Kobena,  A'bena,  F.  Abraba,      „  Beniida,  Tuesday. 

Kwaku,  A  k  11  a  (Akuwa),  r,y^ i\\ii\di&,  Wednesday. 

Yaw,  F.  Kwaw,  Ya    (Yawa),  F.  Aba,   „  Yaw'da,  Thursday. 

Kofi,  Afiia  (Afiwa),  „  Fid  a,  Friday. 

Kw  a'm  e,  F.  Kwamena,  A  m'm  a,  „  M  e  m  e  n  e  d  a,  Saturday. 

5.  Proper  names  of  persons  given  them  according  to  the  number 
of  children  : 

Mensa  —  Mansa,  the  third  child; 

Anah     —  Manan,  the  fourth^child; 

A  son  &  Botwe,  the  7th  cf'  8th  child,  are  common  to  both  genders; 

Akron  —  N  k  r  6  m  m  a,  tlte  9th  ch  ild ; 

B  ^  d  u     —  B  a  d  u  w  a,  the  10th  child. 

Ata        —  At  a  (Atawa),  a  twin', 

Tawia  —  Tawia,  a  child  horn  after  tivins. 

NUMBER. 
42.    The  plural  is  formed  in  the  following  ways: 

1.  Nouns  with  the  prefixes  g-  e-  or  without  a  prefix 
assume  the  prefix  a- : 

ghene,  a  king,  —    ahene;     ekuw,  a  heap,  —  akuvv; 

gyata,   a  lion,    —  agyata;  nantvvi,  an  ox,  a  cow,  —  anantwi, 

2.  Nouns  with  the  prefixes  g,  e,  a,  am  (an,  an),  or  without  a  prefix, 
assume  the  prefix  m  or  n,  h,  according  to  the  initial  consonant  of 
the  stem  (§  18)  : 

g  b  a,  rt  child,  offspring,  —  m  m  a ;  a  p  a  t  a ,  a  fish,     —  m  p  a  t  a ; 

g  k  w  a  s  e  a,  a  fool,      —  n  k  w  a  s  e  a;  a  m  p  a  n',  a  hat,    —  m  p  a  ii ; 
eda,  a  day,  — nna;  kuku,  a  j^ot,       — nkuku; 

a b  6  a,  a  beast,  animal,  —  m  m  o  a ;        t  u  m  p  a  n,  a  flask,  —  n  t  u  m  p  a  n. 
§  41,  1-3.  gbarima,    obea,    aberante,    ababa,    akoa,    afanji,    abofra,  ata, 
mmarima,  mmea,  mmerante,  mmaba,  iikoa,  mfana,  mmofra,  nta. 

3 


34  ETYMOLOGY.  §  42. 

3.  Nouns   with   the  suffix  n  i,    denoting  persons  (§  38),    assume   the 
suffix    fo    instead    of    ni,    besides   changing    the    jirefix    g-  into  a-: 
obibini,  a  neyro, —  abibifo;  gbantoni,  a  mason., —  abantofo. 

Tlie    plural -prefix    may    be    wanting,    or  it    is  nasal,    following  the 
prefix  of  the  noun  from  which  the  noun  in   question  is  derived : 
O  b  u  r  6  n  i,  a  Ei(ropean^     —  A  b  u  r  o  f  6  or  B  r  g  f  o  ; 
Ofan  ten  i,  c/ i<Vn</e->^<ay/,    —   Mfantefo; 
O  k  r  a  n  n  i,  an  A/cra-nian,   —   N  k  r  a  n  f  o  (from  N  k  r  a  u,  Akra). 

4.  Some  nouns  assume  the  suffixes  f  o  and  w  a  or  m  a, 
besides  the  change  of  their  singular  prefix  : 

gmanni,   a  coiintry-inan,  acqnainiance,  —  amannifo; 

afe,  a  mate,  comj^anion,   —  mfefo; 

gyare,  a  sick)icss,  —  nyarewa;  Stife,   ((  Jcei/^    —  nsafewa. 

ade  (Ak.  adee),   a  thing ^   —  nnewa,  nneema. 

a  d  w  e,  a  palm-nut-Tcernel,  —  h  h  w  e  a. 

.5.  Some  nouns,  expressing  family  relation,  friendship  and  otlier  asso- 
ciation, assume  the  appositive  pronoun  or  suffix  nom,  frequently  with- 
out changing  the  singular  prefix: 

a  g  y  a,  father,   —  a  g  y  a  -nom;  en  k,  mother,  —  e  n  Ti  -  n  o  m  ; 
n  a  n  d,   a  (/rand-parent,  —  nana-nom,  n  en  a -nom; 
o  k  u  n  u,  a  husband,  —  o  k  u  n  u  -  n  o  m  ;  g  y  e  r  e,  a  tvifc,  —  gyere-nom  : 
onua  (=  oni  ba),  a  brother,  sister,  —  onua-nom,  anua-nom; 
owura  (owira),  -mader,  —    owura-nom,  awura-nom; 
gygnko,  adamfo,  a  friend,  —  gyghko-nom,   nnamfo-nom; 
Kwasi  (§41,4)  —  Kwasi-nom,  J<iv.  and  his  followers.  S.  §  63. 
teferew,  a  coekroaeh,  —  nteferew-nom,  cockroaches  and  other  beetles. 

6.  Some  compounds  assume  a  plural  prefix  also,  or  only,  before  their 
second  component  part: 

g  s  g  f  0  p  a  n  y  i  h ,   a  hiyhpriest.    —  a  s  g  f  o  -  m  p  a  n  y  i  n ; 

gheneba,  a  child  of  a  king,   —   ahene-mma; 

ab  u  r  u  w  a  b  a,  a  child  of  a  slave,  rile  person,  —  m  m  u  r  u  w  a  -  m  m  a ; 

hyiadan,   a  house  of  assembly,  liyia-adan; 

h  o  m  e  d  k,  the  day  of  rest,  —   h  o  m  e  -  n  n  a. 

7.  Sometimes  the  plural  form  is  repeated: 

e  k  u  w,   a  heap,  —  akuwakuw;    epgw,  a  knot,   —    apgwapgw; 
efi,  a  sheaf,  —   afiafi;  etgw,  a  lump,  —  ntgwntgw. 

'I'he  repetition   sometimes  signifies  all  the  different  sorts  of  a  thing: 
mmoawa-nimoawa,  insects  and  animcdcides  of  all  kinds. 

8.  Some  nouns  have  two  or  more  plural  forms: 
ghene,  a  king,  —   ahene,  ahemfo; 

gpanyin,  a  yroun  person,  elder,   —   mpanyin,   mpanyimfo; 

obirempgh,  a  man  of  tvealth  or  high  rank,  ab...,  ab...fo; 

g  k  w  a  s  e  a,  a  fool,  stiqjid  fellow,  —   ri  k  w  a  s  e  a,   n  k  w  a  s  e  a  f  o ; 

gman,  a  nation,  —  aman,  amj'ihaman; 

ade,  a  tiling,  —  ade,  nnewa,  nnewa-nnewa,  nneema,  nneema-nneema. 


§  43.  44.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  35 

43.  Many  nouns  have  only  one  form  for  the  singular  and  plural: 

1 .  Nouns  formed  with  the  nasal  prefix,   denoting 

a.  individual  things,  perhaps  consisting  of  several  parts: 

mpa,  nnae,  a  bed,  couch]  nsa,  the  hand;  nsenifi,  n  2)air  of  scales. 

h.  collective  multitudes : 

mfgte,   nkraiV,  ntetea,   different  kinds  of  ants. 

2.  Names  of  parts  of  the  human  body : 

ani,  the  face.,  eye;  anim',  the  face;  aniwa,  tJie  eye'.,  aso,  the  car'., 
ano,  the  mouth;  afono,  tlie  cheeh:,  efvvene,  the  nose;  ese,  atooth'^ 
tekrema,  the  tony  tie:,  kom  a  (Ak.  konona),  the  heart. 
There  are  exceptions:  eti,  otiri,  the  head]  atiri,  heads  of  cowries; 
enan,  the  foot,  pi.  nan,  anan  ;  onammgn,  the  .sole,  pi.  anammgi'i; 
dompe,  Ak.  kasae,  a  bone,  pi.  nnompe,  hkasae. 

3.  Several  other  nouns  : 

esono,  rtu  elephant]  batafo,  aivild  boar]  edgm,  an  army] 
a  safe,  a  company,  a  ban,  a  house  of  stone]  edin,  a  name. 

Item.  The  singular  or   plural  number  of  such  nouns  may  be  shown 

a.  by  numerals  or  adjectives : 

mfgte  hiaku,  a  ivhite  ant]  nsa  abieh,  two  hands] 

aniwa  koro,  one  eye]  tekrema  apem,  a  thousand  tongues] 

esono  b  e  b  r  e,  many  elephants ;  e  d  i  n  h  o  r  o  w,  different  names. 

b.  by  the  single  or  reduplicated  form  of  the  verb  : 

wgto  abaii,  they  build  a  house]  wgtoto  a  ban,  they  build  houses] 

gkyer^w  nhOnia,  he  writes  a  letter] 

g  k  y  e  r  e  k  y  e  r  e  w  n  h  6  m  a,  he  writes  letters. 

44.  Nouns  admitting  no  distinction  of  singular  and  plural  are : 

1.  Nouns  denoting  collective  masses  or  materials: 

sika,  gold;  dade,  iron]  sauya,  tin]  awowd,  brass;  eisikr  e,  sugar] 
aburow',  corn,  maize]  em 6,  rice]  ahai,  beer]  nso,  ashes. 

Mem.  When  dade  means:  an  iron  tool,  sanya:  a  tin-plate,  peivtcr- 
dish,  a  wow  a:  a  brass-hasin,  —  then  they  have  a  plural  number: 
nnade,  n  sanya,  ri  vv  o  w  a.  —  A  single  grain  of  corn  is  indicated  by 
the  adjective  fua,  single:  burofua,   plur.  mmurofua. 

Different  words  may  be  used  for  the  same  thing  concerning  number: 

ntrama,  screw  a,  cowries  (as  a  collective  mass,  no  sing.^] 
niwa,  a  single  cowry]  niwa  du  (nuodii),  ten  cowries. 

2.  Names  of  actions,  states  and  qualities  (abstract  nouns) : 

OS  a,  tear]  ok  6,  fight]  o\\\  a,  ^  poverty]  gkgm,  hunger]  aguare,  bathing] 
&\\  bq  die  i\,  strength]  iumx,  power ;  iikwa,  asetra, ///e;  ns.e\\,  eurse. 
Instead  of  plural  forms  of  such  words,  as:  icars.,  fightings,  pjowers, 
curses,  thefts,  we  may  use  reduplications,  or  the  adjectives  horow 
(Ky.  liodog),  different,  bebre,  much,  many,  or  the  nouns  ahorow 
(ahodog),  Icinds,  or  composition  with  as  em,  ivord,  doing,  mpen,  times.. 


36  ETYMOLOGY.  §  45.  46. 

ok  6,  a.Vo^  fujliting,  —  akoko-akoko,  repeated  firfJUinr/s,  quarrels-, 

g  kotow,  hotcing  down,  —  ako  toko  to  w,  repeated  bows; 

asat'o  ho  row,    (different)  companies;  osii  bebre,  inan/j  wars; 

tumi  ahorow,  (kinds  of)  2^owers;  awit'osem,  tliieviny,  thefts; 

wako  nkopen  du,  he  has  fought  ten  battles. 
As  a  kind  of  plural  formation  we  may  also  consider  the  infinitive  forms 
with  nasal  prefix  and  palatal  suffix:  mmae,  nkge,  §104,4.5. 

CASE. 

45,  The  case  of  a  noun  is  the  relation  in  wliich  it  stands  to  other 
words  in  the  same  sentence. 

1.  A  uoun  is  in  the  nominative  case,  or  is  called  a  nominative,  when 
it  denotes  the  subject  of  a  sentence,  answering  the  question:  who?  ivliat? 

2.  A  noun  is  in  the  vocative  case,  when  used  in  calling  or  address- 
ing a  person   or  thing. 

3.  A  noun  in  the  possessive  (or  genitive)  case  denotes  the  owner  or 
possessor,  or  the  author,  origin,  home,  source,  place,  time,  stuft'  or  ma- 
terial, contents  &c.  of  another  thing,  or  the  whole  of  which  another 
thing  is  a  part  or  member  &c.  (See  §  193.)  It  answers  the  questions: 
whose?  of  tvliom?  of  what? 

4.  A  noun  in  the  objective  case  is  the  object  of  an  action.  It  is 
called  accusative.,  when  it  denotes  a  person  or  thing  affected  or  pro- 
duced or  otherwise  concerned  by  an  action,  answering  the  questions: 
whom?  tvhat?  It  is  called  dative  or  terminative,  —  on  the  questions: 
to  whom?  for  tvhom?  also:  from  whom?  (Cf.  §  200  —  206.) 

5.  We  add  to  these  the  locative  case,  on  the  question:  where?  re- 
ferring to  nouns  of  place  which  form  the  necessary  complements  of 
certain  verbs.   (Cf.  §  207.  208.) 

46,  In  Tshi  these  different  relations  are  either  indicated  merely 
by  the  position  of  the  nouns,  or  they  require  tli^ir  own  verbs. 

The  latter  case  must  be  reserred  for  the  Syntax;  the  former  would  also 
belong  thither,  but,  on  account  of  the  changes  of  tone  and  elisions  of  prefixes 
frequently  connected  with  it,  we  bring  it  here. 

1.  The  position  of  a  noun  in  the  nominative  case  is  usually  before  the 
verb,  the  subject  of  which  it  is ;  in  some  cases  it  stands  after  the  verb,  es- 
pecially when  the  noun  is  not  the  subject,  but  the  nominative  com- 
plement of  the  verb.  Only  when  standing  after  the  verb,  the  form  or 
tone  of  the  noun  may  be  changed,  under  certain  conditions  which 
will  be  stated  in  §  49. 

2.  A  noun  in  the  vocative  case  usually  stands  before  the  ivords  spo- 
ken  to  the  addressed  person,  not  closely  connected  with  them,  but  se- 
parated  by  a  comma,  and  is  not  changed  by  them  in  its  form. 

M  m  o f  r  a,  m  untie!  Children,  listen .'  O  w  u  r  a,  mini !  Master,  here  I  am ! 


§  47.  THK  PARTS  OF  spf:kch.  37 

Exceptionally  the  vocative  may  be  placed  behind.,  and,  not  from  the 
connection,  bnt  by  the  impassionate  feeling,   the  tone  maybe  altered: 

Ye  aye  wo  deii',  owura?    What  have  tve  done  thee.,  0  master? 

The  vocative  assumes  the  exclamatory  particle  e  (in  F.  also  o)  be- 
hind, when  a  person  is  called  at  a  distance;  e.  g.  Kwasi-e! 

This  (full)  e  has  middle  tone;  it  may  cause  the  low  tone  of  the 
preceding  syllable  to  become  high,  and  may  even  produce  a  change 
of  that  vowel  itself;  e.  g.  a\ve-e!  from  awe,  friend. 

The  vowels  a  and  o  are  sometimes  elided;  e.  g. 

Adwo'e!  Afor'e!  fr.  AdAvoa,  A'foro  (female  proper  names). 

3.  A  noun  in  the  possessive  case  stands  always  before  another  noun 
which  may  be  in  the  nominative  or  objective  or  locative  or  likewise 
in  the  possessive  case  ;  yet  not  the  former,  but  that  other  noun,  under- 
goes changes  under  certain  conditions,  stated  in  §  49. 

4.  A  noun  in  the  objective  case  follotvs  its  governing  verb  and  may 
be  changed  in  this  connection,  as  will  be  stated  in  §  49.  When  the 
dative  and  accusative  cases  are  governed  by  one  verb,  the  dative  case 
precedes  the  accusative  and  is  liable  to  the  changes  alluded  to. 

5.  A  noun  in  the  locative  case  is  connected  with,  and  may  be  chan- 
ged by,  the  verb,   like  a  noun  in  the  objective  case. 

BemarJc.  A  connection  of  two  words  in  equal  case,  called  apposition, 
may  produce  similar  changes  in  the  prefix  and  tone  of  the  second 
word,   as  in  the  position  after  a  possessive  case.  (Cf.  §190.  191.) 

Independent  and  Connected  Form  of  Nouns. 

47.  1.  The  independent  form  of  a  noun  is  that  form  and  tone 
which  it  has  when  pronounced  by  itself  alone,  or  as  the  first  word 
of  a  sentence. 

2.  The  connected  form  of  a  noun  is  that  which,  under  certain  con- 
ditions (§  49),  it  assumes 

a.  after  a  noun  or  pronoun  in  the  possessive  case; 

b.  in  apposition,  i.  e.  after  a  noun  or  pronoun  to  which  the  connected 
noun  forms  an  apposition  ; 

c.  in  the  position  of  an  object  or  a  locative  complement  immediately 
after  the  governing  verb. 

3.  The  changes.^  which  a  noun  may  undergo  in  the  connected  form, 
concern  the  prefix  and  its  tone,  and  the  tone  of  the  stem. 

Hem.  When  a  noun  is  connected  with  a  preceding  word  in  any  of 
those  three  positions  without  such  changes,  we  do  not  call  its  form 
connected,  but  say,  the  connected  noun  has  retained  its  independent 
form. 


38  KTYMOLOCJY.  §48.49. 

-IS.  In  tlic  lnde]}cndent  form  of  iioiuis  we  observe  these  three  points: 

1.  the  noun  either  has  a  prefix^  or  it  has  none; 

2.  the  tone  of  the  prefix  is  low,   with  few  exceptions  (§  40,  2.  4.) ; 

3.  the  tone  of  the  stem  or  of  its  first  sylhvble  or  syllables  is 

a.  low  (perhaps  followed  by  high  or  by  high  and  low  tones); 

b.  high  (perhaps  followed  by  middle  or   low  or  low  and  high  tones). 

Of.  §  40. 

40.  In  the  connected  form  the  following  changes  occur: 

1.  T\\Q  prefixes  e,  e,  o,  o,  are  usually  dropped-,  except  the  preceding 
vowel  be  open  (a  e  g) ;  after  full  e,  o,  the  prefix  o  may  be  retained. 

2.  The  prefix  of  the  connected  icord,  g  (after  a,  e,  g),  or  a,  m,  am, 
joins  the  preceding  ivord  in  equal  tone;  when,  therefore,  the  preceding 
word  ends  in  low  tone,  no  change  takes  place;  but  when  it  en  Is  in 
high  tone,  the  to)ie  of  the  prefix  becomes  liigh  likewise. 

3.  The  tone  of  the  stem  of  the  connected  word  does  not  change  when 
the  preceding  word  ends  in  low  tone;  but  when  the  preceding  word 
(for  which,  in  the  following  examples,  we  substitute  the  pronoun  ne) 
ends  in  high  tone,  we  have  the  following  five  cases: 

a.  the  low  tone  of  the  stem  remains  loir:  abogye  —  n'abogye. 
h.     .,       V        r       ti      n        n       hecomcs  high:  gyonko  —  ne  ygnko. 

c.  the  high,  tone  of  the  stem  becomes  low:  en  a  —  ne  na. 

fZ.     „       „        „       „      „        „  „         middle:  gheue  —  neheue. 

I   remains  high  after  nouns  and  pronouns, 
"       "        «       r      11        )i    I    j^f,QQ^j^^g  middle  after  verbs: 

gba  —  neba;  gheneba;  onni  ba. 

The  first  case  (a.)  is  the  most  usual  with  low  tone. 

The  2d  case  {b.)  comprehends  a  small  number  of  words,  the  first 
syllable  of  which  has  low  tone,  partly  witli  stress,  in  the  independent 
form,  viz.  gyonko,  ghonam,  basa,  bakgn,  batwew,  mmati  iS:c. 
gnammgn,  nantin,  nantvi  &c.  gyafunu.  In  kokiirobeti  the 
first  syllable  becomes  likewise  high:  ne  kokuro  be  ti. 

The  3d  case  (c.)  comprehends  a  small  number  of  words,  viz. 
agya,  enji,  ese,  jino,  akyi,  emu,  eso,   eto,  nsono,  niifu,  gsoro. 
The  words  gsekan,  sun  sum,   are  changed  into    sekaiV,  sun  sum'. 

The  4th  case  (rf.)  prevails  in  the  Akuapem   dialect  over  the  oth. 

The  5th  case  (e.)  may  be  the  prevailing  rule  in  the  Akem  dialect, 
but  comprehends  only  a  limited  number  of  nouns  in  the  Akp.  dial., 
viz.  gba,  eti,  ani,  aso,  ekgri,  yam",  asen,  nsa,  enan,  nkyen, 
eho,  ase.  Ilka,  ene,  edin,  su,  ban,  gyere,  efwene,  mfinimfini, 
and  compounds  of  them,  as:  obabea,  atifi,  atiko,  aniwa,  aniase, 
aiiigye,  nan  ase,  nankronia,  nan  sin,  nansocl  &c. 


§  50-53.  THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  39 

50.  When  the  possessive  case,  preceding  the  connected  noun,  is 
ihsLi  of  a  personal  pronouit^  this  pronoun  lias  higli  tone  (mt'",  wi'i,  n  e, 
yeii',  ni  6,  won')  and  produces  in  the  connected  word  the  clianges 
mentioned  in  §  49,  1.  2.  3.  a.  c.  d.\  but  in  the  cases  3,  h.  e.  the  pronoun, 
giving  up  its  own  higli  tone,  assumes  low  tone. 

Other  changes  of  fhe  original  tone  of  nouns. 

51.  The  high   tone  of  nouns  often  becomes  low 

1.  by  the  connection  with  certain  succeeding  adjectives-,  chiefly  such 
as  have  constant  high  tone;  in  some  cases,  especially  when  elision 
and  assimilation  of  letters  takes  place,  the  two  words  are  written  to- 
gether as  one  compound   word. 

ghene  —  ghene  m  d,  oh  em  pa,  oh  em  mo  ne,  ghenkese; 
n  s u  —  n s u  k  r  6  h  k r  o  n,  n  s ii  pa,  n s  n g h y  e  w,  n s  u  o ri  w  i n i. 

2.  in  derivatives  formed  by  dimimdive  or  piersonal  suffixes: 
ghene  —  ghenewa;  sika  —  osikani;  otuo  —  otufo. 
Exceptions:  asiiwa,   a  hrook;  aberantewa,   abarimawa,  §41,1. 

and  many  nouns  ending  in  ni  and  fo  with  middle   tone.  §38. 

Nouns  formed  by  the  palatal  suffix  have  usually  low  tone  through- 
out, except  the  final  sound,  which  is  high  and  has  the  accent  (or  stress) 
before  it.    See  §  36.  40,  4. 

3.  in  composition  (cf.  §  rJ4) : 

ghene  —  ahemfi,  ahennan,   ahenne(e),   ahenni,   ahensem; 
usii  —  suka,   osukgm,   sukraman,  nsukuriiwa. 

2.  PRONOUNS. 

52.  A  pronoun  is  a  word  which  supplies  the  place  of  a  noun. 

As  we  have  hitherto  spoken  only  of  substantive  nouns,  we  now  speak  of 
8uV)stantive  pronouns,  reserving  the  adjective  pronouns  to  be  mentioned 
with  the  adjectives. 

"We  divide  the  pronouns  into  personcd,  interrogative,  demonstrative, 
indefinite  and  relative  pronouns. 

I.  PERSONAL  PRONOUNS. 

a.  Independent  nominative  forms. 

53.  The  personal  pronouns,  including  one  impersonal  that  is  put 
for  things,  are  in  the  nominative  case  as  follows: 

Sinyidar  Plural 

1st   person:  me,  I  ^/  1.  p.  yen,   ive 

2d  „  wo,  thou  2.  p.  mo,  you 

3d         „  QUO,  he,  she  3.  p.  wgii,  they  (only  for  persons) 

eno,  it;  e n o,  euonom,  they  (for  things). 


40  KI'YMOlJXiY.  §  54-56. 

Item.  When  ono  or  eno  follows  after  the  verb  lie  (§  102,  1)  as  a 
nominative  complement,  it  does  not  only  loose  its  prefix  (as  in  the 
objective  case  §  56),  but  is  even  reduced  to  a  mere  final  n,  viz.  nen=:ne 
no.  §  199,1.  —  Ono  nko,  he  alone,  may  be  shortened  into  ne  nko. 

h.  Prefixed  nominative  forms. 

54.  When  prefixed  to  the  verb  (§  89),  the  nominative  case  appears 
in  the  following  shortened  forms : 

before  a  (ji)  e  g  e  o  in  the  verb :  m  e-  w  o-  g-  e-  y  e-  m  o-  w  o- 
before  gya,  nya,  tvi  a,  e,  o,  i,  u:  mi-  w  u-  o-  e-  ye-  m  u-  wo- 
together  with  the  prefix  a-:  ma-woa-wa-a-   yea-moa-wga- 

Mem.  1.  In  wo  a-  yea-  mo  a-  wga-  the  vowel  before  a-  is  almost 
lost  in  pronunciation,  and  the  prefix  e-  is  entirely  lost  with  a-. 

2.  The  prefix  e-  serves  not  only  to  indicate  things,  but  is  also  some- 
times used  instead  of  the  personal  pronoun  w  g-,  e.  g. 

M p  a n y  i m f 0  n a  e b u  u  be,  the  elders  made  a  proverb. 

c.  Possessive  forms. 

55.  In  the  jwssessive  case  (§  45,  3)  gno,  eno  are  changed  into  ne: 

1.  p.  me,  my  ye")  our 

2.  p.  wo,  thy  mo,  your 

3.  p.  ne,  Jtis,  her,  its,  "'gi'i,  their  (of  persons). 

their  (of  things); 
With  de  after  them  (§  Q2)^=mine,  thine,  his,  hers,  ours,  yours,  theirs. 

Bern.  1.  Before  i,  n  &c.  they  are  pronovnced  mi,  wu,  iii,  yen,  m  u, 
w  o  n,  but  only  y  e  n  and  w  o  li  are  written  so. 

2.  Before  the  prefix  a-  the  vowels  in  me,  (wo),  ne,  are  lost,  and 
we  write:  m'  (w'),  n';  e.  g.  m'ani,  my  eye;  n'ano,  7ms  mouth . 

3.  After  the  verb  we  write:  no  so,  no  mu,  no  h6=ne  so,  ne  mu,  ne  ho. 

4.  On  the  tone  of  these  pronouns  in  the  possessive  case,  see  §  50. 

d.  Objective  forms. 

56.  In  the  objective  case  (§  45,  4)  the  prefix  of  gno,  eno,  is  dropped. 

1.  p.  me,  me  yen,  vs 

2.  p.  w  0,  thee  m  o,  you 

3.  p.  no,  him,  her,  (it),        wgn,  them  (of  persons). 

(them,  of  things) ; 
Pern.  1.  When  referring  to  a  thing  which  is  easily  understood  from 
the  context,  the  pronoun  no  is  usually  omitted.   §  202,4. 

Wa  bis  a  no,  he  has  asked  him  (her).  Ye  no  yiye!  malcc  it  well! 
Akutii  no  wg  he?    Kwasi  afa  de  ama  Kofi,    na    Kofi  ad\, 
where  is  that  orange?  Kw.  has  taken  (it)  and  given  to  Kofi,  and 
K.  has  eaten  (it). 
Rem.  2.    In  quick    speaking    me,    wo,    ng,    mo,    occasionally    drop 
their  vowel,  or  no  is   shortened  into  ne. 

W^jidam'ase,  he  has  thanked  me.  Monye  n'  *iye,  do  it  well'. 
Miyi  w'  aye,  I  j)^'oise  thee.   MenyTim'!  I  shall  get  you\ 
Ne  ho  aye  ne  den,  he  has  recovered. 
Neho  nye  ne  den,  he  is  unwell. 


§  57-59. 


THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH. 


41 


57.  When  the  pronouns  in  the  objective  case  arc  reflexive,  they 
are  compounded  with  tlie  noun  h6=self: 

m  e h  6,  w  o  h  6,  n  c  h  6,  y  e  h  h  o,  m  o h  6,  w g  li  li  6,   myself  dc. 
Odo  neho,  he  loves  himself:  ye  do  yen  ho,  ice  love  ourselves. 

When  the  action  expressed  by  the  verb  is  reciprocal,  eitlier  this 
compound  form  of  the  objective  pronoun,  or  only  the  last  part  of  it, 
or  the  verb,  is  doubled  : 

Wgdo  wonho-wonho,  or  wodg  wohho-ho,  or  wgdodo  wgulio, 
tlicij  love  each  other. 

58,  A  comparative  view  of  the   personal  pronouns: 


a.  Indepen- 
dent forms: 

h.  Prefix        .,, 
n                ivitk  a- 
forms: 

c.  Possessive 
forms: 

Objective 
forms: 

1. 

me 

me-,  mi-,    ma- 

me,     me,  m' 

me. 

\n\     meh  6 

2. 

wo 

w  0-,  w  U-,    w  0  a- 

w  6,      w  6,  w' 

wo. 

w',     wo  ho 

3. 

gno 

g-,      0-,        w  a- 

ne,      ne,     n' 

no. 

n',      nelio 

eno 

e-,      e-,       a- 

ne,      ne,     n' 

(no. 

n')     neho 

1. 

yen 

ye-,    ye-,    yea- 

yen',  yen 

yen, 

y  e  n  h  6 

2. 

mo,  (horn) 

mo-,  mu-,    moa- 

mo,     mo 

mo. 

m',    moho 

3. 

won,  (yen) 

wg-,  W0-,    wga- 

wgn',  won 

w  g  n 

,           w  0  n  li  6. 

enonom 

e-,      e-        a- 

ne,      ne,    n' 

Bern.  1.   In  the 

Fante  dialect  of 

Cape  Coast  we 

have 

them    thus : 

1. 

eme 

me,   mi,  m' 

me 

me,m',  meh  o 

2. 

ewo 

e,  e,  ewo  (a) 

wo 

wo, 

w  0  h  o 

3. 

gno 

g,  0 

ne 

no, 

neho  (nohoj 

1. 

ehyen(nom) 

nye 

nyere 

hyen,  nyereho 

2. 

ehom(nom) 

(e)h  0  m 

horn 

hom 

h  0  m  h  6 

3. 

ewgn(noTn) 

wg 

w  g  r  e 

wgn 

wore  ho. 

'Yhe.  3rd pers.  sinrj.  does  not  distinguish  persons  and  things  (cf.  §  89,7), 
and  the  prefix  e-  before  the  verb  is  used  for  the  ^^(7  pers.  sinfj.  instead 
of  W0-.  The  full  forms  of  the  plural  may  be  added  before  the  prefixed 
and  possessive  forms.  The  2d  and  3d  pers.  plur.  (hom  and  h  won)  seem 
to  be  sometimes  nearly  equal  in  sound. 

Pern.  2.  In  the  Aftem  and  Asante  dialects  the  pronouns  of  the  sin- 
gular number  are  as  in  §  53— .57.  The  2.  piers,  pjlnr.  is  hom  and  mo; 
the  1.  and  3.  pers.  plnr.  are  alike:  yene,  ye-,  yere,  yen. 

This  latter  circumstance  is  very  inconvenient,  but  is  explained  tlius: 
the  original  form  of  the  3.  pers.  plur.  is  ben  (still  found  in  the  dialect 
of  Aburi,  a  town  of  Akuapem);  it  was  changed  into  wen,  and  now 
either  the  voivel  was  made  labial,  to  suit  the  labial  consonant:  wgn, 
in  Fante  and  Akuapem;  or,  the  consonant  was  pialatalized,  to  suit  the 
palatal  vowel:  wen  (which  is  retained  in  Okwawu),  and  then  passed 
over  into  merel/j  palatal  y:  yen,  in  Akyem  and  Asante. 

»59,  The  personal  pronouns  are  made  empiliatic  by  adding  or  suf- 
fixing the  particles  ara  or  an  k  as  a,  or  both  together. 


ETYMOLOdY.  §  60. 


meara,  mankasa,  moara  ankasa,  even  I,  I  mijself; 

woara,  wo  ankasa,   wo  ankasa  ava,  thou  ihi/sclf; 

on  oar  a,  ouo  ankasa,  n  ankasa,  he  himself,  she  herself; 

enoara,  evoi  that,  just  that,  the  same. 

yenara,  yen  ankasa,  toe  ourselces', 

moara,   mo  ankasa,   yon  yourselves', 

wonara,  won  ankasa,  they  themselves. 
(In  Fante:  emcara,   m'ara;   ewoara,  w'ara;   iiuava,   n'ara; 

(e)hyen  ara;  (e)homara;   wonara:  ankasa  may   be  added.) 
These  eomitound  forms  may   be  placed  before  the  prefixed  or  ])os- 
sessive  or  objective  forms: 

meara  mafa,  I  myself  have  taken  (it); 

woara  woaka,  thou  thyself  hast  said  (if); 

meara  me  dan,  my  own  liouse:,  nankasa  nc  fi,    his  oini  home; 

masopa  mankasa  meho,  I  have  disgraced  my  own  self; 

wododo  wonara  wonho,  they  love  (only)  their  own  selves. 

II.  INTEBROaATIYE,  DEMONSTBATIVE  and  INDEFINITE 

PRONOUNS. 
<»0,     I'he    following-    (substantive)    pronouns  denote 
1.  p<^i'Sons,  2.  things,  3.  places,  4.  times, 
5.  manner  and  quantity  (including  measure,  weight,  number) : 

1.  chena  (bona,  Ak.  hwana,   nhwae,  F.  wan  a),   who? 
pi.  ehenanom,  ehefo?    tvho? 

oyi,  this  one,  pi.  eyinom,  these  men  or  persons; 

oyiara,  this  very  person. 
obi,  some  one,  anotlier;  ebinom,  some  or  other  people; 

obiara,  any  one,  any  body. 
oniko,  oyako  (])1.  yanom),  the  (single)  person  concerned  (used  chiefly 

in  indirect  questions;  cf.  §  74,  1). 
uea  (=gno  a,  Ak.  dea,  he  who)    is  a   subst.  })ron.   compounded   with 

the  relative  pai'ticle  'a'.  §  65. 

2.  deiV   (Ak.  dee  ben,  deeii,  sen)?   what  (what  thing)? 
dckode,   what,   ivhich  thing  (in  indirect  questions), 
eyi,  adi  ('=ade  yi),  this  thing;  eyinom,  these  things. 
ebi,  biribi,  some  (of  it),  something. 

e  b  1  a  r  a,  b  i  r  i  b  i  a  r  a,   anytlt  ing  ; 
fwe,  fwefwe  (Ak.  fwete),  anything,  with  negative  verbs:  nothing; 

e.  g.   fwe  nnim'  kora,  fwefwe  unim',  ebiara   nnim'  fwerede, 
there  is  jiothing  in  it  at  all. 
uea  (Ak.  dea,  =ade  a),   that  which.  §  65. 

3.  ehe  (Ak.  eh  one)?  tvhere  {=  which  pilace)? 

eh  a,  ehayi,  ehaara,  ehanom  (Ak.  ueha'),  li ere,  just  here,  hereabout; 
eho,  ehono,  ehoara,  ehonom   (Ak.  dob  a),   there,  just  there,  the  reahouL 
(Sometimes  ehg  denotes  time:  ehono,  chobere  no,  at  that  time.) 
nca  (Ak.  dea),  tlie  place  ichere.  §  65. 
Cf.  babi  (Ak.  beabi),  somewhere;  pi.  mmeammea,  /'n  d/fferoit  places, 

mma   nnyina'  (hhina),  in  all  places,  everywhere.  §  125,  1. 
fiiko,  which  place  (in  indirect  questions);  the  place  concerned.  §  125,  2. 


§61-63.  THE  PAKTs  OK  spj<;k(Jii.  43 

4.  da  bra  (Ak.  dab  one)?  when?  lit.  tvliat  dai/? 
enc,  nuc  (a  contraction  of  eda  yi,  this  doi/).,  io-datj. 

dabi,  someday;  da,  -with,  negative  verbs:  never;  dabi  =  »o,  i>  14G,  3. 
da,  da  da,  dapem,  dayi,  F.  daba,  often,  ahvai/s. 

5.  den  (Ak.  sen)?  how?  in  what  manner  or  quality? 

ahe  (Ak.  sen)?  hoio  nnicli?  how  many?  ichat  quantity,  pri:c,  numhcr? 
sa,   sa',    se'   (=sa  yi,    se   eyi),    in  this  manner,  quality  or  quantity, 
so,  such,  thus. 

CI.  Most  of  these  pronouns  (§  60)  may  be  used  in  the  nominative^), 
or  2^ossessive-),  or  oJjjective^),  or  locative^)  case,  and  are,  concerning 
their  independent  and  connected  form,  treated  like  nouns. 

1.  Ehena  na  owg  ho?  who  is  there? 

Mo  mil  hen  a  na  onim?  which  of  you  Jcnotvs  (it)? 

Ne  den  na  ay  era?  (lit.  Jiis  what  i.  e.)  what  or  ivliich  of  his  thinys 

is  lost?   Ne   biribiara   n'yerae  e,  (lit.  his  anything  was  not  lost 

yet,  i.  e.)  nothing  of  his  things  is  lost. 

Wo  he  ye  wo   yaw'?   (tJuj  where  makes  thee  pain)  where  do  you 

feel  pain?  Mehayemeyaw  se,  (lit.)  my  here  xmins  me  very  much. 

Ne  sa  n'ye!  (lit.  its  so  is  not  good  i.  e.)  it  is  not  good  so. 

2.  Ehena  tam  ni  (=ne  yi)?   ivhose  cloth  is  this? 
Eye  oyi  dea,  it  is  this  one's  (thing,  §  62). 

Den  as  em  ni?  (lit.  what-things  matter  i.  e.)  what  matter  is  this? 

Ahe  abtirow  ni?  how-much  (money's)  i.  e.  for  how  much   (money) 
corn  is  this? 

Sa'  onipa  yi,  (lit.  such- quality's  man  this  i.  e.)  such  a  man. 
3'.  Woakofre  hena?  wliom  did  you  (go  to)  call? 

Mafre  eyinom,  I  have  called  these  (people). 
4.  Wagye  me  ho  sika,  he  has  taken  money  from  me  (lit.  my  there). 

G2.  The  indefinite  pronoun  de  (Ak.  dee,  =  ade,  adee,  thing)  is  put 
after  a  possessive  case  instead  of  a  noun  mentioned  before,  to  avoid 
its  repetition,   or  with  a  general  (indefinite)  meaning. 

Eha    (Abibirim    ha)  nkoko  nso    se  Abrokyiri    de,    the  fowls 
here  (in  Negro-land)  are  not  so  large  as  those  of  Europe. 

Ohene  no  nsrafo  n'ye  nnam  se  oyi  de,  that  king's  soldiers  arc 
not  so  hrave  as  this  one's  (tliing^soldiers). 

Mehu  mede  a  no,  I  shall  see  my  things'  end,  i.  e,  I  shall  see  how 
to  arrange  or  settle  my  matters. 

Eye  mede,  wo  de,  ne  de,  yen  de,  &c.  it  is  mine,  thine  &c.  §  55. 
Sometimes  the  emphatic  particle  'a'   (§  75,  2)  is  added  to  de: 

Otam  yi  ye  me  dea!  this  cloth  is  mine,  lit.  my  thing  (indeed)! 

(Ak.  Otam  yi  wo  me,  this  cloth  [sticks,  i.  e.]  belongs  to  me.) 

Hem.  The  indefinite  pronoun  de,  compounded  with  the  relative  par- 
ticle 'a',   without  reference  to   a  noun  mentioned  before,  see  §  65. 

63.  'y\\Q  plural  pronoun  nom  is  added  to  names  of  persons,  in 
order  to  mark  in  an  indefinite  way  the  followers  and  companions  of 
that  person,  himself  included. 


44  ETYMOLOGY.  §  64. 

Paulo  nom  tii  fii  Pafo,  Paul  (indhis  compami  loosed  from  Paphos. 

Acts  13,  13. 

This  nom  is  also  used  in  apposition  or  as  a  suffix  with  nouns  and 

pronouns  to  provide  for,  or  strengthen,  their  plural  form  ;  see  §  42,  5.  and 

enonom,  ehomnom,  ehenanom,  eyinom,  ebinom,  yanom,  eha- 

nom,  ehonom,  §  53.  58  Bern.  1.  60,  1.3.  and  yinom,  binom,  §74. 

///.    Pronouns  in  connection  ivifh  the  relative  particle  'a'. 

(Relative  Pronouns.) 

C4.  The  relative  pronouns  of  the  English  and  kindred  languages 
are  expressed  in  Tshi  by  the  invariable  particle  'a'  (equal  to  the  un- 
inflected  Hebrew  relative  '^'^'^^)  and  a  subsequent  pronoun,  which,  how- 
ever, in  some  cases  is  wanting. 

1 .  The  particle  'a'  is  called  relative  (=referring),  because  it  refers 
to  some  previous  word,  a  noun  or  pronoun,  termed  the  antecedent', 
but  it  points  also  forward,  and  connects  with  the  antecedent  a  snh- 
ordinate  adjective  sentence  (§  257),  in  which  a  prono^in  in  the  nomi- 
native^), or  possessive-).,  or  objective^),  or  locative^)  case,  answering  to 
the  antecedent,  is  contained,  or  at  least  understood,  viz.  when  it  refers 
to  a  tiling'^)  —  not  a  person,  —  or  sometimes  also  to  a  place^). 

2.  The  antecedent  may  have  a  distinguishing  adjective,  y i,  no,  b i 
and  ko  (§74)  before  the  relative  particle,  or  yi,  no,  b  i,  at  the  end 
of  the  adjective  sentence,  or  even  in  both  places. 

Bern.  The  case  of  the  correspondent  pronoun  is  independent  from 
that  of  the  antecedent. 

l.Obi  a  oko  asii  ni!  tJicre  is  one  that  goes  for  water. 
Abofra  a  oreko  asi'i  yi(ara)  abo  ahina  'ne, 

this  (ver/j)  hog  going  for  water  has  broken  a  2^ot  to-day. 
Yedo  won   a  wodo  yen,  ive  love  them  that  (ov  those  ivho)  love  us. 
2.0  nip  a  bi  wo  ho  a  ne  nsd  awii, 

there  is  (or  was)  a  man  tvhose  hand  is  (or  was)  ivithcred. 
Obarima  a  nenan   apira  no(ara)  as  an  aba, 

the  (same)  man,  whose  foot  is  wounded,  has  come  again. 
Me  a  me  nti  ohuti  a  mane  no,  medg  no, 

I,  for  whose  salce  he  suffered,  love  him. 

3.  M  i  h  ft  u  obi  a  g  w  o  a  k  a  n  o, 

/  saw  somebody  whom  a  snake  has  bitten. 
Weill II  obea  (no)  a  owo  aka  no  no, 

he  has  seen  the  (that)  woman  whom  a  snake  has  bitten. 
Wo^gwoakawono,  wusiirosiinson, 

thou  whom  a  snake  has  bitten,  fearest  a  slow-tvorm. 

4.  Ade  a  gmpe  ni,  this  is  a  tiling  (which)  he  does  not  like. 
Ade  a  mempe  no  n  i,  this  is  the  thing  (that)  I  don't  like. 
At  em  mil  ko  a  mode  bu  no,  wode  bebii  mo, 

with  what  judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged.  Mat.  7,  2. 


§  65.  66.  THE    PARTS   OF   SPEECH.  45 

W  a  k  y  e  r  e  m  e  a  f  i  r  i  a  m  i  n  h  ii  u  b  i  d  a, 

he  has  shotrn  me  an  engine  an  equal  of  -which  I  have  never  seen. 

5.  0  d  li  u  a  k  u  r  a  a  o  s  o  e  e  li  o   k  a  I'l   n  o, 

he  arrived  at  the  village  tohere  (in  which)  lie  had  put  uj)  fornierlg. 

6.  Y  e  b  e  f  i   w  i  a  s  e  a  y  e  b  a  e  y  i  a  k  o   b  i  6, 

we  shall  leave  this  world.,  into  which  we  came.,  to  go  away  again. 

65,  Nea,  Ak.  dea,  is  an  indefinite  or  demonstrative  substantive 
pronoun,  denoting  a  j^et'son  or  thing  or  place  or  manner,  tvilh  which 
the  relative  particle  'a'  is  compounded,  pointing  forward  to  a  sentence 
by  which  the  person,  thing,  place  or  manner  is  defined.  Serving  in- 
stead of  ono  a,  ade  a,  biibi  a,  it  combines  the  antecedent  and  the 
connective  power  of  the  relative  pronouns  and  adverbs  of  European 
languages,  answering  to:  he  who,  she  who,  he  that,  what  (=that  which), 
(the place)  where,  the  manner  (extent  d-c.)  in  which;  but  in  the  words 
following  after  it,  a  correspondent  pronoun  must  be  used  or  understood, 
to  make  up  the  sense  conveyed  by  the   said  relatives  in  English. 

l.Nea  oko  asii  na  gbo  ahina,  lie  ivho  goes  for  water  breaks  the  pot. 

2.  Dea  enimae  da  s  li  a,  ivhat  has  never  yet  come  to  pass  is  not  much. 

3.  Nea  dba  pen  na  esah  ba,  what  has  liappencd  once,  liappens  again. 

4.  Nea  owo  akano  siiro  sunsoh, 

he  whom  a  snake  has  bitten  fears  a  sloiv-ivorm. 

5.  Nea  gkom  gye  ne  m"e',  what  hunger  desires  is  satiating. 

6.  Nea  n'ani  akyew  nk  ofvve  toam', 

he  tvhose  eye  is  squint,  looks  into  the  calabash. 

7.  Nea  owui  no  ba  ni,  this  is  the  son  of  him  tvho  died. 

8.  Kyerew  neawoyee  no  ho  asem,  tvrite  the  story  of  tvhat  they  did. 

9.  Nea  onna  na  onim  nea  gnna, 

he  who  does  not  sleep  knows  him  who  does  not  sleep. 

10.  F  w  e  nea  wgye!   look  what  they  do! 

11.  Obi  iVkg  nea  wg bekum'  no,  nobody  goes  where  they  will  kill  him. 

12.  Nea   won 6m  (hg),  wohnuare  h  g,  ivliere  they  drink,  there  they 

don't  wash,  i.  e.  a  place  of  drinking  (water)  is  not  used  for  washing. 

'Ihe  antecedent  pronoun  contained  in  nea  stands  in  the  nominative 
in  the  sentences  1 ,  6,  9rt,  —  in  the  possessive  case,  in  7,  8,  —  in  the 
objective  case,  in  96,  10,  —  in  the  locative  case,  in  11,  —  in  the  loca- 
tive case  put  absolutely  (like  a  nominative)  at  the  head  of  the  sentence, 
in  12.  The  corresponding  pronoun  in  the  adjective  sentence  is  in  the 
nominative  in  1,2,3,7,9,  —  in  the  possessive,  in  6,  —  in  the  objec- 
tive, in  4,  5,  8,  10,  —  in  the  locative,  in  11,  12;  it  is  not  expressed, 
but  left  to  be  siq^pjlied  in  3,  5,  8, 10,  11,  (12). 

3.  ADJECTIVES. 

6G.    An  adjective  is  a   word  added  to  a  noun,    in  order  to  mark, 
or  distinguish    it   more    accurately.      We  speak  of 
/.  adjective  nouns,  II.  adjective  pronouns,  III.  distinguishing  particles. 


46  ETYMOLOGY.  §  G7-G9. 

I.  ABJECTIVE  NOUNS.   (Qualifying  Adjectives.) 
<»7.  Adjective  nouns  denote,  qiialiti/,  i.  c.  any   distinguisliing  ioaturo 
of  a  thing;  e.  g. 

onipa  pa,  a  good  nian]  gdaii  kese,  a  large  house. 
Some  denote  quantity  and  indefinite  nu)iibev\  e.  g. 

kakra,  Z//^7c, /e?t';  bebre,  pi,  mwh.,  nuun)  \  nny  ina  (iilii  na),  r/7/. 
Some  of  tliese  have  adjective  pronouns  and  piarticles  added  to  tlieni : 
kakrabi,  ketewabi,  kfimabi,  some  few,  few  onhj; 
pi  noara,  most,  the  greater  number;  nhina,  'ra,  all  togrtlier. 
Hem.  The   word  for  all,  in  the  F.  dial,  of  Dena  (Elmina)  liina,  is 
probably   a  noun  ( =^totality)\  we  prefer  to   write    nhina,    instead   of 
nnyina;  on  the  mute  h,  cf.  nhonia,  nhwi,   §  8.  11. 

The  definite  numerals,  denoting  some  exact  number,  see  §  76-84. 
OS,  The  adjective  of  quality  (or  quantity)  is  used  in  two  ways: 
a.  attrihidively,  e.g.  adesoa  durudi'iru,  a  heavy  load; 
h.  i)redicativcly,  e.  g.  adesoa  no  ye  duru,  that  load  is  heavy. 
When  predicative,  the  adjective  is  subjoined  to  a  verb  of  existence,  as: 
ye,  to  he,  dan,  to  hecome,  nyin,  to  grotv. 

Hem.  Many  adjective  nouns  are  also  used  as  substantive  nouns  and 
as  adverbs.  §  70,  4.  5.  71.  133. 

60,  Concerning  their  structure,  adjectives  are 

1 .  Primitives : 

a.  Some  have  the  form  of  simple  or  seemingly  compound  verbal  stems : 
d e,  siveet ;  f e,  fnie ;  den,  Itard ;  d u r  u,  hen vy ;  f u a,  single ;  kese,  great. 

b.  Some  have  their  last  sound  lengthened : 

nya,  sloiv;  pi,  much;  sa,  tough;  tc\  straight;  komm,  quiet; 
ha  nil,  light,  bright;  fokye,  ivet,  moist;  kanw6,  fresh. 

2.  Derivatives: 

a.  Many  different  forms  are  obtained  by   simple  or  double  reduplica- 
tion of  primitive  stems,  by  reiteration  and  repetition : 

dodo,  numerous;  fofo,  fat;  gyewgyew,  rude,  rough; 
ny  iny  finy  iny  a,  sour;  kr/manana,   silent. 

b.  Some  are   derived  from  nouns  without  any  change  of  form : 

nso,  ash-coloured;  akutu,  orange-yellow;  a^hkiihono,  lemon-coloured. 

c.  Some  are  the  repeated  plural  forms  of  nouns : 

aboabo,  stony;  apowapow,  knobby;  nsoensoe,  thorny. 

d.  Some  adjectives,  formed  from   verbs,  chiefly  by  the  palatal  suffix, 

are  almost  exclusively  compounded  with  their  nouns: 

n  a m  p  r  0  w  e,  rotten  meat;  n  a h  h  o  w  e,  dried  meat; 

okwanfuwi,  an  overgrown  ivay;  duwui,  §  31),  1. 

s  c  n  k  y  e  n  e'=asem  a  ekyei'i  so,  an  atrocity ; 

a  d  e  s  o  a  k  y  e  ii  e ,  an  excessive  burden. 

ab  u  r 6  w  gu  n  n  u  a n  e',  gunnuaiV,  guai'inuaiV,  dry  corn.,  ripe  maize ; 


§  70-72,  THE   PARTS   OF    SPEECH.  47 

e.  In    ^nlioma  guan,    a    dry   shin,    we    have    an   other    adjectival 
derivation  from  the  verb   guan,  red.  guhnuaii,  tu  wither. 

3.  Compounds: 

These  are  few  in  number,  and  their  component  parts  can  often  not 
be  plainly  reduced  to  other  existing   words. 
kokodOma,  red:  kontohkye,  crooked;  ab  on  ky  iabo  n  ky  i,  mieven. 

70.  Some  adjectives  are  used  in  only  one  form  : 

either  simple.,  as:  bone,  had'^  bun,  unripe \  hunu,  OHpt!):,  §  G9,  1  h. 
or  reduplicated  and  compound.  §  69,  2.  3. 

The  adj.  pon,  large,  great,    is    only    used  in  compounds.  §  39,  1. 

Others  have  two  or  more  foi*ms,  making  different  use  of  them  : 

fe(few),  fefe,  fefefefe,  f  eU},{e,  fme,  handsome;  pa,  pap  a,  r/oofZ; 

koknro,  kokuroko,  large:  krana,  krctnanana,  silent. 

We   distinguish: 

1.  an  altrihutive  form,  frequently  reduplicated,  after  a  nonn: 
mfonini  fefe,  a  fine  picture;  obo  dennen,  a  hard  stone-^ 
atade  foforo,  a  neiv  garment;  ode  momono,  raw  gam. 

2.  an  aitrihidive  form,  usually  simple,  compounded  with  a  noun : 

agorufew,  a  fine  play;  hkodeh,  a  hard  fighting; 
gde-amono,  unboiled  gam;  auflmmono,  raiv  meat; 
ohemforo,  ghem  foforo,  a  neio  Icing;  ayeforo,  a  bride. 

3.  a  predicative  form,  simple  or  reduplicated  : 

dua  yi  ye  fe,  this  tree  is  fine;  dade  ye  den,  iron  is  hard; 
ode  no  ye  momono,  that  yam  is  unboiled; 
atade  no  ye  foforo,  that  garment  is  new. 

4.  an  adverbial  form,    frequently  reduplicated,    sometimes  twice,    and 
often  with  contraction  of  the  middle  members : 

wogoru  fefefe  (f efe(f)efe),    they  play  very  nicely; 
ohyeno  denn  e(nn)e nnen,  he  forces  him  very  hard. 

5.  a  substantive  form: 

ne  few,  its  beaidg;  neho  fe,  his  handsomeness; 

ne  den,  his  hardness;  ne  foforo  a  eye,  its  neivness; 

pApa,  goodness:,  kese,  kokuroko,   greatness,  largeness. 

71.  Besides  the  nouns  of  quaVdy  (§  68  iiem.  70,  5),  nouns  for  persons 
are  derived  from  adjectives  by  the  prefixes  o-  or  a- : 

obbne,  a  tvicked  man;  gfoforo,  another  (a  new)  person; 

ofufu,  gkokg,  gkese,  g  ten  ten,    a  white,  red,  stout,  tall  person:, 

aketewa,  akfima,   akwadil',  atia'  (akwatia),  a  little  man. 

72.  Some  adjectives  have  a  plural  form,  simple  or  repeated  : 
kese,  large,  pi.  akese;  abo  akeseakese,  large  .stones; 
ketewa,  small,  pi.  nketewa;  mmoa   hketenkete wa; 

a  k  u  m  a,  little,  pi.  n  k  u  m  ;1  ;  m  m  o  f  r  a  n  k  u  m  a  h  k  u  m  a. 


48  ETYMOLOGY.  §  73.  74. 

7«$.  1.  The  notion  of  more  and  most  in  some  qualities  is,  after  pre- 
dicative adjectives,  expressed  by  the  verbs  kyen  and  sen,  to  siuyass  : 

Dade  yc  den  sen  kobere,  iron  is  hard  surpasses  copper. 

Neho  ye  fe  kyen  neniia,  she  is  handsomer  than  her  sister. 

Me  ddn  ne  wode  so;  na  nede  (so  or  ye  kokuro)  sen  ne 
n  bin  it  (sen  n'abien  nbina,  or,  sen  ad  an  nhina),  mi/  hoiise 
and  thine  arc  large;  Tjid  his  is  the  tarfjcst  (the  largest  of  the  three, 
or,  the  largest  of  all  houses). 

2.  The  quality  may  also  be  expressed  hy  a  noun  put  after  a  verb 
of  comparison  in  an  adverbial  way. 

Sika  kyen  nkrdnte  nnam,  gold  surpasses  a  sword  (in)  sharpness, 

i.  e.  gold  is  sharper  (effects  more)  than  a  sword. 

Biribi  iVkyen  ogya  koko,  angthing  not  cxcells  fire  (in)  redness, 

i.  e.  nothing  is  redder  than  fire. 

3.  When  a  higJi  degree  of  some  quality  is  to  be  expressed  without 
comparing  another  object,   it  is  done  by  reduplication,  or  by  adverbs: 

Madi  adua  bi,  dededede,  I  have  eaten  a  fruit,  exceedingly  sweet. 
AduaiV  no  ye  de  sc,  that  food  is  very  j^alatahle. 
Dua  kese  pa,  dua  kokuro  se,  a  very  large  tree. 
Eye  den  dodo,  it  is  very  hard,  or  too  hard. 

4.  The  notion  of  most  is  also  expressed 

rt.  by  noara  added  to  attributive  adjectives  of  quantity: 

Nnipa  pi  noara  aba  ofie,  tnost  of  the  p)eople  have  come  home. 
Mmofra  d  6  do  w  noara  ka  akyiri,  most  children  remain  hehind. 
h.  by  a  predicative  adjective,    especially  after  the  verb  ne,   referring 
to  other  objects  of  comparison  with  the  postposition  mu  (^=among). 
Eye  aba  nhina  mu  ketewa,  it  is  the  least  of  all  seeds. 
E'ne  kese  wo  fan  nhinri  mu,  it  is  the  greatest  among  herbs. 
E  n  y  ^  w 0  n  e  a  k  Ti  m  a  w  o  n' a s  a f  o  h  e n  e  m  u,  thoii  art  not  the  least 
among  his  cai^tains.  (Cf.  Mat.  13,  32.  2,  6.) 
c.  by  the  verb  ne  and  a  predicative  adjective  or  noun  (generally  pre- 
ceding the  verb),  without  mentioning  other  objects  for  comparison. 
Okese  no  ne  wo,  tli on  art  the  greatest.  Cf.  §199, 1. 
A k lima  ne  me  wo  m'agya  ofi,  I  atn  the  least  in  my  father's 
house.  (Jnd.  6,  15.) 

5.  The  notion  of  compxirative  smcdlncss,  without  mentioning  another 
object  of  comparison,  is  expressed  in  some  adjectives  of  quantity  by 
the  diminidive  termination,  with  the  addition  of  bi  or  se: 

Madi  nam  ketewa  se,  I  have  eaten  very  little  meat. 
Wama  me  kakra  bi,  he  has  given  me  very  little. 

II.  ADJECTIVE  PHONO UNS.  (Distinguishing  Adjectives.) 

74.  Adjective  j^t'ononns  denote  distinction,  by  pointing  out  some 
particular  thing  or  things  of  a  class. 


§  75.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  49 

Tliey  are  i)derrogat}ve^),  or  flenionsfraflve-),  or  i)idffinife^),  .and  aro 
used  cither  simple,  or  compounded  witli  tlie  particle  ara,  which  in- 
ci'easos  the  particularizing-  power  of  the  former  ^)  '-')  and  the  gene- 
ralizing' power  of  the  last  ^). 

1.  hen?  icJiicJi':'  icJiat?  used  in  direct  questions; 

ko  (^=onc).,   which.,   irJiaf,  in  indirect  questions,  points  out  the  single 
(respective)  person  or  tiling  in  question. 

2.  yi,  pi.  y  i,  yinom,  this,  these,  point  out  something  present  or  near; 
no,  that,  those,  the,  points  out  something  in  a  distance,  or  something- 
mentioned  and   known  already;  in  many  cases  it  answers  to  the 
definite  article  in  English.  —   (nom.  ])lural  pronoun,  see  in  §  G.3.) 

3.  hi,  pi.  bi,  binom,  a,  a  certain,  another,  sorne\  biara,  any. 

1.  Abofra  ben  na  wiisoma  no?  which  tjoi/  has  he  sent? 
IMinnim  fibofra  ko,  /  do  not  know  (the  single  hoy)  lohich. 
Wato  ntama  ben?  which  (or  tvhat)  cloth  has  he  bought? 
Wan  ky ere  me    ntama  ko    a  wato,    he  did  not  show  me  which 

(or  what  land  of)  cloth  he  has  bought. 
Onipa  kese  ben  ni!  what  a  great  man  is  this ! 
O'di  dvvuma  beriara?  what  hind  of  occujjation  has  he? 
Bisa  no   da  ko  a  obeba,   ash  him-  which  day  he  will  come. 

2.  Abofra  yi  yare  da,  this  child  is  always  sick. 

Odan  yiara  wo  no  (ye  ne  dea),  Just  this  honse  is  his. 
Obea  no  ba  no  wo  he?  icherc  is  the  child  of  that  woman? 
Abofra  no  ara  ni!  this  is  just  that  boy  (that  very  or  the  same  boy). 
?).  Obofo  bi  aba,  a  (certain)  messenger  has  come. 

Woatu  abgfo  bi,  tlicji  have  dispatclied  some  messengers. 
Wahkii  no  asem  biara,  he  did  not  tell  him  anything. 

III.  Distinguisliing  Particles. 

*7*%.  1.  The  relative  particle  'a',  which  also  serves  for  distinction 
by  pointing  out   an  individual  from   a  class,   see  in  §  64. 

2.  The  same  particle  'a',  when  not  followed  by  a  sentence  belong- 
ing to  it,  is  no  more  called  relative,  but  emphatic. 

OtAm  yi  ye  wo  dea,  this  cloth  is  thine! 
Eye  me  ba  atade  k\  it  is  my  son's  coat!  Gen.  37,  33. 
Onye  wo  kunu  a!  he  is  not  thy  husband.  John  4,  18. 
W6  a!  woye  abofra!  as  for  you,  you  are  a  boy! 

3.  Emphatic  particles,  commonly  classed  with  the  adverbs,  are  often 
found  added  to  a  noun  or  pronoun,  to  render  the  distinction  of  the 
respective  person  or  thing  from  others  more  prominent  ; 

iira,  ahkasa,  even,  seZ/'(cf.  §59. 74) ;  iiko,  nkuto,  nkuto-kore,  alone, 

de,  taken  apart,  concerning,  as  for; 

mmom',  rather,  especially;  \)o,  m])0,  even;  n  so,  also; 

Ohene  ankasa,  /he  king  himself.    Ono  n  k  o,  n e  li  k 6,  he  alone; 

wo  likuto,  thou  alone.    Me  de,  me  kg,  as  for  me,  I  shall  go. 

Op  any  in  mmom'  na  ese  no,  for  an  elder  especially  it  is  fit. 

Ohene  po,  even  the  king;  okye;1me  nso,  the  linguist  also. 

4 


50  ETYMOLOGY.  §  76-78. 

NUMERALS. 
•70.  Nui)ien(ls  (lonoto  the  mimbor  of  tilings. 

1.  '\']\i'  iinlrlliiHe  iini)ieral''\  which  do  not  denote  any  exact  nmiiher, 
are  classed  among  the  adjectives,  see  §  07.  73,  4.  5.  74,  o. 

nni'pa  pi,  manif  men;  nnipa  nhlna,  all  men;  nni'pa  bi,  some  men. 

2.  'J"he  definite  numerals,  denoting  some  exact  nnmber  (e.  g.  nnipa 
dii,  fen  men),  are  treated  of  in  this  j)lace.  They  are  always  used  after, 
or  compounded  with  nouns,  hut  may  be  considered  rather  as  ah.sfraet 
nouns  (of  numher'i ,  which  have  a  noun  before  them  in  the  possessive 
case   (or,   which   are  in   apposition  to  that  noun),  than   as  adjectives. 

Concerning  their  form,  we  distinguish  lirnnary  and  eonipound  nume- 
rals ;  concerning  their  use,  we  speak  of  eardinul  numerals  (§77-79), 
and  of  iieraiice  and  ynnliipriratice  (81),  disirlbuilve  (82),  ordinal  (8.3) 
and  fractional  (84)  numerals. 

Whilst  in  Kii,2:li>h  &c.  the  form  of  the  cardinah  is  changt'd  for  the  ordinals  Sec. 
wo  liave  in  Tslii  not  to  state  a  difference  of  form,  but  only  a  ditlermcft  of  w^e. 

CAEDINAL  NUMERALS. 

Pritnarii  Numerals. 

77.  The  twelve  primarif  numerals,  from  wliich  all  the  rest  are 
formed  by   composition,   are  the  following: 

e  k  o,  ekoro,   one       anah,  nnan,  four       ason,  nsoi'i,  seren 
enu,   nnu,  two  anum,   nnum,  five       awotwe,  hwotwe,  ei/jJit 

esa.   nsa,  three  asiA,   nsia,  six  akron,   hkroh,   vine; 

edu,  ten;  oh  a,   hundred;  apem,  thousand. 

The  three  first   of  these  numerals  are  used   in  their  simple  form   in 
counting   and   in   composition    with   some  nouns  (§  80):  in   other  cases, 
forms  compounded  with  b  i,  denoting  any  individual  of  a  kind,  are  used  : 
biako,   Aky.   bieko,  Akp.   hako,  o)ie; 
abien'   (=abienu),  Ak.   mmienu,  tivo; 
abiesjt,  Ak.   m  m  iensa,  ^//>yc. 

nko,   alone,  only,   is   an   adjective  (§  75)  and    an   advcr!); 
koro  stands  also  as  an   adjective,  for  sinyle,  only. 

Compou)id  Xiimcrals. 

78.  Real  compounds,  in  which  two  or  three  primary  numerals  are 
made  up  into  one   word,  are  the  followiug: 

I.  The  numerals  from  eleven  to  nineteen  are  formed  by  com[)osition  of 
edu  with  the  units,  the  latter,  exce})t  biako,  having  the  nasal  ])reiixes 
and  the  tone  of  the  connected  form  : 

II.  edubiako,   dubako,  11.   edi'innah  17.   edunscH) 

12.  edi'imieiV,   dumienu,        1.').    imI  u  n  n  u  m        IS.   edu  11  wot  we 

13.  edumiensa,  IG.   edunshi  IV.  e  d  I'lh  k  roi'i. 


§  78,  THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  51 

2.  The  tens  from  twcntij  to  nineiji  are  formed  by  composition  of  adu, 
plural  of  edu,  with  the  units,  the  latter  having  the  vowel  prefixes, 
with  some  euphonic   changes,   and  the  tone  as  in   composition: 

aduonu,  tit'cnty  ad  nan  an,  fortii         aduoson,  seventij 

adu  as  a,   thirtij  aduonum,  fiftij         a  duo  wot  we,  eUjIdii 

tiK'se  two  words  have  low  tone      a d  u  0  s  1  a,  suJi'i  a  d  u  a  k  r  o  n ,  n  'nrfii. 

tlirouglioiit,wiien  standing  alone.  '  ■'  i    »t  /t  -  j- 

3.  The  hundreds  are  formed  by  composition  of  aha,  plural  of  oha 
with    the  units,  having  the  nasal  prefix,   except  alias  a  (ahaasaj  .• 
ahannu,  ttco  hundred  a  ban  si  a,  six  hundred 

abas  a,  three  hundred  a  ban  son,  seven  hundred 

a  ban  nan,  four  hundred  ahah  w  o  t  w  e,  eiyht  liundred 

ahannum,  five  hundred  ahankron,  nine  hundred. 

Ohserv.  The  words  abanu,  abasa,  when  unconnected,  have  low 
tone  throughout. 

4.  The  thousands,  by  composition  of  mpem,  plural  of  apem,  with 
the  units,  having  the  nasal  prefix  and  the  tone  of  the  connected  form: 

mpennu,  turj  thousand  rapemnsia,  six  thousand 

m  pens  a,  three  thousand  mpemnsoh,  sevoi  thousand 

m  p  e  m  n  a  n ,  four  thousand  mpem  n  w  o  t  w  e,  ei<jht  thousand 

mpemnum,  fve  thousand  mp  em  h  kr  o  ii,  nine  thousand. 

5.  By  composition  of  apem  in  tlie  shortened  form  ope-  with  edu, 
oha,  apem,  are  formed: 

op  edu,  ten  thousand,  ope  ha,  liundred  thousand,  gpepem,  a  million; 
and  the  ten-thousands.,  hundred-thousands  and  millions,  by  composition 
of  opedu,  op  eh  a,  opepem,  with  the  units,  in  the  same  form  and 
tone  as  the  tens,  hundreds  and  thousands.  But  cf  §  79,  2, 

opeduonu,  tiuenty  thousand       ope  duo  si  a,  sixtij  thousand 
upeduasa,  thirty  thousand         opedu o so li,  seventy  thousand 
opeduanan,  forty  thousand       g  p  e  d  u  g  w  6  t  w  e,   eighty  tliousand 
ope  duo n  urn,  fifty  thousand        gpeduakroii,  ninety  thousand. 

gpehanu,  op  eh  as  a,  gpehannan&c. 

gpepennUj  gpepensa,  gpepem  n  an   &c. 
So  we  may    also  form : 

g p e  p  e  d  u ,  ten  millions :    g  p  e  p  e  h  a,    hundred  millions ; 
gpepepem,  thousand  millions,  a  milliard:,  gpepepepem,  a  billion. 
But   we  may  also  say : 

mpem  du,  mpem  aduonu,    mpem    ha,    mpem    abannu... 
mpepem  du,   mpepem  ha...   Cf.  §  79,  2. 

6.  For  indefinite  numbers  of  tliousands  and  millions,  we  have  the 
following  expressions: 

mpem- mpem,  thousands;  mpem  jihorow  mpem,  tliousands  of 
thousands ;  g  p  e  h  u  h  a  a,  mpem  m  p  e  m  h  u  b  a,  g  j  i  e  p  e  h  a,  g  p  e  p  e  1 6, 
many  thousands,  hundred-thousands,  millions. 


52  ETYMOLOGY.  §  79.  80. 

70.  All  tho  romaining  mimorals  are  not  oxprossod  by  perfect  com- 
poiinds  (§.'50,  1.2.),  but  by  combination  of  tbo  liig-Jjor  numeral  witb 
the  lower,  tbe  former  always  preceding  tlie  latter:  the  units  arc  joined 
to  the  tens,  and  the  tens  to  tlie  hundreds,  by  a  hyphen  and  by  the 
tone  of  connection  (in  aduonn,  adnasa,  ahanu,  ahasa  the  last 
sylbvble  is  then  likewise  high);  e.  g  a  dn  o  n  u-b  i  a  kd,  firoif//  o)i(\ 
a d  u  a  n  a n  -  a  b  i  e  iV,  forfi/  two,  a  d  u  a  k  r  n  ii  -  a  b  i  e  s  ;1,  nincfi/  ili rrc 
jihasa-aduosia- a  nil  m,   fhrer  Jiuiidred  (nid  s/xf//  five. 

2.  When  the  thousands,  ten-thousands,  hundred-thousands  i<c.  are 
not  given  in  single  round  numbers,  as  above  (§  78,  4.  o),  the  plural 
forms  mpem,   mpepem  Ac.  are  used;  e.g. 

ni  p  e  ni  d  u  n  s  (')  n ,   17000  ;   m  ])  e  m  a  li  a  n  n  u  -  a  d  u  a  n  a  ii  -  a  n  u  m ,  345000 ; 
mpepem  aduasfi-akron,  3!)000000;  mpepem  ahannaii-aduosia,  KiOOOOOOO. 

o.  Between  tlie  thousands  and  the  lower  numerals,  and  between  the 
hundreds  and  units,  when  there  are  no  tens,  the  conjunction  ne  may 
be  used:  e.g.    mpem    d  ix  n  n  u  m    ne    ahannu  ne  asoii,  15207. 

Cf '^I'wi  Kenkan  N  horn  a,  Prlii/rr  for  the  Veniacuhir  ScJiooJs  in 
Alxuapeui,  Aketn  i(c.  pag.  84.  8.'). 

Nouns  roii/jjoinuh'd  triili  Nnuwriils. 
SO.   1.  When  the  numerals  from  one  to   foi  refer  to  persons,  they 
may   be  compounded   with    ba  =  oba,  person,    but   the  'a',  coalescing- 
witli   the  prefix  of  the   simple  numeral,   is  long: 

bako,   banu,   bfisii,  ban  an,  basia,  bjison,   bjiwotwe,   bakron. 
These    compound  forms    are    put    in  apposition  after  names  of  per- 
sons or  pronouns,  and  are  also  used   as  complements  of  verbs: 

Xnipa  basa,  tJtree  wen,  as  it  were:  men,  a  triad  of  j)ersons. 
Won  bason    nhinil  awuwu,  (lU  tlie  seven  hare  died. 
Ye  si  ban  fin,  n'e  (ire  four  (persons). 
Wo  nam   banu,  llieji  iralk  tiro  toijellier. 

2.  (Jbako,  obiako,  obiakofo,  one  VKin,  ii  sin jle  person,  are  used 
substantively  without  another  noun. 

3.  Compound  nouns,  denoting  the  place  which  a  person  according 
to  his  birth  takes  among  other  children,  so  that  the  numeral  has  the 
value  f)f  an   ordinal   numeral   (§  8:3),   are  the   following: 

abjikan,   a  firstborn  cliild:  Manu,   name  of  the  second  cJiild; 
ten  names  mentioned  in  §  41,  5;  Duko,   name  of  the  eleventh  child. 
W^awo  abaduasa,  she  has  horn   ihirtij  i.  e.  plenty  of  children. 

4.  From  pdon,   hell,   clorjc,   we  have  the  following  compounds: 
doukoro.   one  o'clock  'n  on  son,  .s'e»*e«   o'clock 
'noii-abieiV,  tiro  o'clork               'n  on  wot  we,   einht  o'clock 
'non-abiesa,     'nonnan,               'nonkron,      'nondu, 
'nonnum,      'nonsia,                       'n  on  -  diiljako,      'non-dumien. 


ij.S  1.8-2.  TIIK    I'AUTS   OF    Sl'iOECII.  53 

5.  From  c  d  a,  daif  : 

(lakoro  (dat'ua),  d  a  hiako,  one  (I  i;/,  unanu,  l/ro  ddi/.s, 

11  n ansa,    iina'ttai'i,   nna'aum,   u nan  si  a,   iinanson,  3  —  7  days; 

11  naa  wo  t  \Ve,  8  days,  a  tveek\  n  na  a  kron,   dadii,  0,  10  days; 

d  a  d  u  -  d  a  b  a  k  6,   d  a  d  u  -  n  n  ;i' in  i  c  iV,   d  a  d  u  ■  n  n  a' ni  i  (^  n  s  a,  11 — 13  d. 

d  ad  u- nil  a' nan,  J4  days,  dad  u-n  n  a'n  u  m,  15  days,  a  fortiii;ili(; 

d  a  d  u-ii  n  a n  s  i  a,  d  a  d  u-n  n  a  n  s  6  n,  d  a  d  I'l-ii  n  a  n  \v  o  t  w  t',  Ki-IH  days ; 

a  d  a  d  u  o  n  u,   a  d  a  d  u  a  s  ii ,  a  d  a  d  ii  a  n  a  n  ...  20,  30,  40  days  rtv;. 

(5.   From   afe,  year: 

mf  en  sa  =  mfr  ihy  ia  abiesa,    tliree  years. 

7.  From  gfa,  side,  part: 

f'ako,  one  side,  afanu,   a  fas  a,  at'anan,  2,  3,  4  sides; 
11  kr ante  anot'anu,  a  Iwo-ed'jed  sword. 

♦<.   From  li  i  n,  edye,  foriier : 

a  li  i  n  a  s  L  three-cornered,  trianyidar ; 

alii  n  ana  n,  four-cornjred,  qu'tdr  any  alar,  quadrate,  square; 

a  hi  nasi  a,  liexayonal,  sexanyafar ; 

a h  i  11  w  0 1  \v  e,  oclayonal,  octanyidar. 

9.   From   own,  death: 

a  \v  u  o  n  u  =  0  w  u  -  p  e r e n  n  ii,  second  death. ; 
awuduasa,  30  deaths,  all  possible  kinds  of  death,. 

Iterative  and  Midtiplii-ative  Numerals. 

HI.  Definite  frequency  (in  answer  to  tlie  question:  Jiow  many  limes':') 
is  expressed  by  composition  or  combination  of  the  definite  numerals  with 
the  noun  pe  ii(peren),  a  sinyle  attempt,  stroke  or  time,  pi.  mpcii,  times: 

pen,  penkoro,  preko,  once,  one  time,  at  once; 

m  p  e  r  e  n  n  u,  m  p  e  n  a  b i e  n,  twice ;  m  p  e r  e  n s  a,  m  p  e  li  a  b  i  e  s  ;1 ,  thrice ; 

mpen   an  an,   a  num...,  four,  jive  ...  limes. 

2.  In  answer  to  the  questions:  how  many  times?  (in  multiplication) 
and:  how  manifold?  the  nouns  ahorow,  kinds,  and  mmoho,  douhliny, 
addition,  are  used;  e.  g. 

E  d  u  a  h  o  r  o  w   a  b  i  c  n  ye  a  d  u  o  n  u,  2  times  10  are  20 ; 

Osii  me  anahmu   in  in  oho  a  nan,  Jte  replaced  (il)  to  me  jour  fold. 

Distributive  Numerals. 
82.    "^I'he  ecjual   distribution  of  the  same  number  of  a  thing  to  se- 
veral subjects  or  objects  is  expressed  by  the  repetition  t)f  the  numeral; 
in  this  case   biako  has  a  plural  form.    In  combinations  of  higher  and 
lower  numerals,  the  repetition  of  the  latter  is  sufficient. 

Won   hhina   bisaano  m  m  ia  kO-m  m  i  a  k  6  se:   Eye  me  ana? 

they  all  asked  him,  one  by  one,  sayiny :  is  it  I? 
O  b  i  s  a  a  won  m  m  i  a  k  6  -  m  m  i  a  k  6,  he  asked  them  on e  by  on e. 
Omaa  mmofra  du  no   hhina  mmaii    du   du, 

he  yave  those  ten  boys  each  of  them,  ten  strinys. 
M  a  to   dab  o  d  ;i  b  o   a  n  a  n ,  m  m  a  h   a  d  ii  o  n  u  -  a  n  I'l  m  -  a  n  u  m , 
/  have  houyht  four  ducks,  each  for  25  strings. 


54  ETYMOLOGY.  §  83. 

Ordinal  Numerah. 

83.  The  ordinal  numerals  of  European  lan<j;uai:es,  denoting  tlie 
place  which  any  thing  holds  in  a  series,  do  not  exist  in  Tshi.  'J'he 
want  is  supplied  (besides  compositions  like  those  mentioned  in  §  80, 
o.  [4?]  9.)  chiefly  by  verbal  phrases : 

di  kan,  di  ho,  tia  or  to  so  abien,  abiesa,   anan... 

1.  The  first  ('person),  nea  6di  kan;  he  or  slie  is  (he  first,  6di  kan; 
[he  first  (tliina),  first!//,  nea  edi  kan;  it  is  the  first;  edi  kan. 

Explanation.  The  verb  di  has  many  meanings:  to  wove,  to  act,  to 
OCcupi/  ((y-.  ((v:.;  its  complement  kan  is  a  noun,  denoting  the  first  or 
foremost  ("or  former)  place  or  time  in  a  series  of  places  or  events :  it 
is  also  found   like  an   adjective  in  compounds. 

O'di  kan  =  lie  occupies  tlie  first  place;  oba  kah,  lie  comes  first. 

aba  kan,  a  firsthorn  cllild,  ad  e  kan,  aduankah,  firsifrnits. 

2.  The  second  (person),  nea  odi  ho; 

he  or  she  is  the  second:  odi  ho,  lit.  he  occupies  the  (next) place  there; 
the  second  (thimj),  secondly,  nea  edi  ho;  it  is  the  second^  edi  ho. 

3.  The  2d,  3rd,  4th  &c. person: 

nea  otia  or  otoso  abien.  abiesa,   anan..., 
nea  otia  won  or  oto  won  so   banu,   bassi,  banau; 
the  2d.  Srd,  4th...  (thinfi),  serondli/,  thirdlii.  forlhli/. . ., 
uea    etia    or  etoso   abien,  abiesa,   anan.... 

Expl.  These  phrases  may  be  explained  thus: 

t  i  a  =  to  add  (in  order  to  fdl  up  or  make  up  a  sum), 
to  s o  =  to  lay  (or  lie)  ahove  or  tipon ; 
etia  anan=:«Y  adds  (or  is  added,  and)  mahes  up  (the  sum  of)  four; 
otia  woii  hason  ^=  he  aufiments  them  (to  a)  seven  of  persons; 
oto  mmofra  yi  so  di'i  =  he  lays  upon,  or  acids  to.  these  hoys  (one 
to   whom  in  counting  belongs  the  number)   ten. 

4.  "iZe  is  the  lasf--  is  expressed  by  : 

odi  akyiri,  he  occupies  the  haclc-part ; 

oka  akyiri,  he  remains  hehind; 

otwa  to,  he  cuts  off  the  hind  end; 

okata  mp;1,  he  covers  the  hind  part  (said  of  a  train  of  })ersons). 

5.  The  interrogative  adjective  pronoun  ichiih  (of  the  numher)?  what 
(numljer)?  is  circumscribed   in  a  similar   way: 

\V  Oil  kail  ii  ho  111  a  aiiiim  yi  mu  nea  ewo  h  e  ?  or  nea  eto  so   ahe? 

ivlmh  of  these  five  hooks  have  you  read? 
Makan  nea  etia  anjlii,  1  have  read  tlie  fourth. 

Hem.  'J'he  'Mfantsi  Grammar'  of  Carr  and  Brown  gives  as  ordinals, 
beside  the  cardinal  forms,  compositions  of  the  cardinals  with  dze  =  de, 
yet  without  examples  of  their  actual  use.  The  use  of  this  de  is  to  be 
explained  as  in  §  62,  and  confirms  the  observation  that  the  cardinal 
numerals  are  nouns,  §  76,  2.  E.  g.  If  instead  of  the  last  example  given 
in  this  §,  we  should  say:  Ma  kah  an  ah  de,  it  would  signify:  /  hare 
read  that  (book)  ichic:]i  belongs  to  (or  makes  up)  the  number  of  four. 


§  8-4-80.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH. 


Fraclioind  Niimhers. 

S4,  The  whole  of  a  thing  is  expressed  by  einu,  phir.  a  m  fi  a  in  fi, 
wliicli  words  may  be  considered  as  nouns,  or,  wlieii  added  to,  or  euni- 
j)ound  with,  another  n<jiui,  as  adjectives.  Sometimes  I'l  li  i  n  a  (nny  i  n;i), 
all,   is  added  besides. 

0  m a  n  -  m  u  n  o   h  li  i  n  a   b  e  h  y  i  a  e.  the  ivliole  people  aascnihled. 
The  half  of  a  thing  is  expressed    by   the  noun  ofa,    [)lur.   afaaf;1. 
One  fourth  may  be  expressed  in  the  following-   ways  : 

nkyem'   or  a  b  u  ])  e  n  a   e.  tia  or  etoso   an  ah,  lite  foniili  j)art; 

nkyem'  anah  m  ii  biako,  one  amoiKj  four  j)arts ; 

h  k  y  e  m'-  a  n  a  h   b  i  a  k  6,  one  fourth-part. 

Three  fourtha: 

nkyem'  anah   mu  abiesa,  or:   hkyem'-anah   abiesa. 
For  tcnth=^lithe,  titlmi'j,  we  use:  ntoso  du,  plur.  ntotoso  di'i  du. 

.5.    VERBS. 

85.  A  verh  is  a  word  by   which   we  ascribe  doinu  or  liein-)  (a'-tioii 
or  state  and  qnaliti/)   to  a  person   or  thing  call(Ml   the  subject. 
The  action  or  state  expressed  by  the  different  verbs  may   be 

1.  an  action  of  the  subject,   concerning  an  object:  e.  g. 

bo,  to  strike;  di,  to  eat  (C'c,  ka,  to  hite;  tow,  to  throw;  hu,  to  see; 
dwen,  to  think;  sow,  to  hear  (friiitj;  wo,  to  hear  (a  childj. 

2.  an  action  (or  motion)  confined  to  the  actor: 

a.  an  active  state: 

su,  to  weep;  nam,  nantew,  to  walk;  gorn,  lo  play;  guah',  to  flee. 
[d  i  d  i,  to  eat;  tono,  lo  forfie.  are  also  used  without  mentioning  an 
object,  though  these  actions  are  not  confined  to  the  suliject.] 

b.  a  chamje  of  state: 

nyih,  to  (/row;  guah,  nydm,  to  wither;  here,  to  redden,  ripen. 

3.  an  inactive  state: 

a.  a  temporary  stale  or  condition:  ^ 

da,  to  lie;  gyina,  to  stand;  home,  to  rest;  yare,  to  he  sick. 

h.  a  lasliny  qiudity: 

so,  to  he  larye;  siia,  to  he  smalt;  ware,  to  he  lon<;;  here,   lo  he  red. 

Transitive,  Jntransitive  and  Locative   Verhs. 

<Stt.    1.  Verbs  requiring  an  object  or  two  objects  are  called  tran- 
sitive; some  examples  see  in  §  8,5,  1. 

2.  Verbs  not  requiring  an   object  are   called   intransitive,   §  85,  2   3. 

3.  Many  verbs  are    used     both    transitively    and    intransitively,    the 
meaning  in  the  two  cases  usually  showing  some  difference. 


56  ETYMOLOGY.  §  .S7-89. 

4.  The  same  idea  may  be  expressed  in  botli  ways  by  different  verbs. 
didi,   di  aduaiV,   lo  fdt  (food);  kasa,  ka  as  em,  to  spcaJc  (icords). 

5.  Verbs  expressing  motion  to  or  frojn  a  place  (direction),  or  rest  in 
aplace,  and  requiring  a  complement  of  place,  are  called  locative  (§  208). 

fi,  to  come  (forth)  from;  ko,  to  (jo  (sometfhere) ; 
te,  to  sit,  lire  (in  a  place). 

87.  Other  kinds  of  verbs  will  be  spoken  of  hereafter,    \\z. 
impersonal  verbs,  §  157,  2;  auxiliary  verbs,  §  106 — 111 ; 

so  also  the  different  objects  or  complements  of  verbs,  §  200 — 209, 
and  certain  stationary  comhinations  of  verbs  with  specific  sahjects  or 
objects  and  other  complements,  §  210  —  220. 

General  Structure  of  the   Verb. 

88.  1.  The  verb  in  its  bare  form  is  a  primary  or  secondary  or 
seemingly  compound  stem,  simple,  with  1  to  3  syllables  (§  28,  2.  3.), 
or  reduplicated,   with   2  to  6  syllables  (§  29,  4). 

2.  By  inflexion,  various  prefixes  and  a  suffix  are  joined  to  the  stem, 
to    indicate:    a.  the  sidjject  (person  and  number),    b    tense   and  mood, 

/  c.  negation,  also  d.  previous  goimj  or  rorninf)  for  the  performance  of  an 
action.  —  A  passive  voice  does  not  exist  in  Tshi.  It  is  supplied  by  the 
active  verb  with  suitable  subjects,  or  by  intransitive  verbs.   §  165  Hem. 

3.  Monosyllabic  and  disyllabic  (the  latter  with  the  trisyllabic  and 
polysyllabic)  verbs  are  different  in  tone. 

INFLEXION  OF  THE  VERB. 

Ferson  and  Number.    Frouominal  Prefixes. 

80.  1.  Person  and  number  are  indicated  by  i\\c  personal  pronouns 
prefixed  to  the  verb  in  the  forms  shown  in  §  54. 

2.  In  the  third  person,  singular  and  plural,  the  pronominal  prefix 
is  omitted,  when  the  subject  is  expressed  by  a  noun  or  independent 
pronoun.  In  the  imperative  form  for  the  2d  pers.  sing,  the  pronoun 
is  always  omitted.  Of.  §  245,  2. 

3.  When  of  two  or  more  successive  verbs  the  first  has  a  jjrouou/i- 
nal  prefix,  it  is  not  repeated  with  the  following  verbs,  exce})ting  that 
of  the   1st  pers.  sing. 

4.  "jChe  tO)ie  of  the  pronominal  prefix  varies  in  the  different  tenses 
and  other  forms  of  the  verb,  being  either  low  or  high,  either  e([ual 
to,   or  in  contrast   with,  the  tone  of  the  adjoining  syllable. 

5.  But  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  prouoiuis  of  tJie  ^d  persou, 
singular  and  plural,  usually  have  liiijh  tone,  even  when  the  other  ])ro- 
nouns  in  the  same  forms  have  low  tone.    See  in  §98  the  small  figures. 


§ou. 


THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH. 


57 


6.  In  the  stem  of  the  verb,  we  have  no  cliange  regarding  person  or 
number,  except  reduplication  (§  99),  by  which  a  plurality  of  subjects 
or  objects  or  places,  or  frequency  of  an  action,  may  be  indicated  ; 
but  the  simple  stem   does  not  exclude  such   plurality  or  frequency. 

7.  The  pronominal  prefixes  being  tlie  same  in  all  forms  (except  tone), 
we  give  them  all  only  here,  in  their  threefold  form  (before  open  sounds, 
before  close  sounds,  according  to  §  17,  and  together  with  the  prefix  a-) 
and  shall  afterwards  only  mention  the  3rd  pers.  sing.,  or  occasionally 
the  1  St  and  2d  pers.  sing. 


1.  pers.  sing. 
2. 


pers.  plur. 


1 .  pers  sing. 

2.  r, 


1.  pers.  plur. 

2.  „         „ 

3.  „ 


men  am,  /  loulk 

w  6  n  a  m,  tJiou  icalkest 

onam,  he  or  she  ivalks 

ewom',  it  is  true 

ye  nam,  we   walk 

monam,  you  walk 

won  am,   Ihey  walk. 

minim,  1  knoiv 
wunim,  llioii  knowest 
onim,  he  or  she  knows 
e  n  n  i  m',  it  is  not  true 
y enim,  ive  know 
miinirn,  i/ou  know 
wonim,  tliey  know. 


mate,  I  have  heard 
wo  ate,  thou  Jtast  heard 
wate,  he  (she)  has  heard 
asow,  it  has  horn  (fruit) 
ye  ate,  we  hare  heard 
mo  ate,  you  have  heard 
woate,  they  have  heard. 

mahfi,  /  have  seen 
woahu,  thou  hast  seen 
wahu,  he  (she)  has  seen 
adu,  it  has  arrived 
yeahu,  we  have  seen 
moahu,  you  have  seen 
woahu,  tliey  have  seen. 


m  i  n  i 

F 

ra  i  n  y  i  m 

Ak.  mahunu 

F 

m  a  h  u 

w  u  n  i 

„ 

e  n  y  i  m 

„  woahunu 

'7 

ahu 

o  ni 

„ 

o  n  y  i  m 

.,  w  a  h  u  n  u 

„ 

w  a  h  u 

e  n  n  i  m 

„ 

onn  im' 

.,  aduru 

,, 

wadu 

yeni 

„ 

n  y  e  n  y  i  m 

„  y  e  a  h  u  n  u 

„ 

ny'ahu 

m  u  n  i 

,, 

e  h  0  m  n  y  i  m 

,,  moahu nu 

h  0  m  a  h  u 

yeni 

„ 

wonyim. 

„  yea  h  u  u  u 

„ 

woahii. 

These  two  groups  of  examples  we  give  also  in  Akan  and  Fante. 


2 
3.     „ 

1 .  jjers'.  plur. 

2.  „ 

3.  „ 


Moods  and  Tenses. 

OO.  1.  The  Infinitive.,  usually  counted  among  the  moods,  is  in  fact 
no  more  a  verb,  but  converted  into  a  noun ;  yet  it  will  be  treated 
under  the  head  of  'Verbs'  in  §  104.  -  Partidples  do  not  exist  in 
Tshi.  —  The  only  true  verbal  forms  are  those  which  assert  (or  deny), 
command  (or  wish,  entreat,  forbid),  or  ask  a  question. 

2.   The  Tndirative  Mood,  i:onta'nnn^  those  forms  whicii  assert  directly, 
has  seven  different  forms,  in  which   we  find   distinguished: 
a.  the  time  of  the  action  indicated  by  the  verb,   with  reference  to  the 

time  of  the  speaker  or  of  another  action,  and 
h.  the  completion  or  incompletion  of  the  action,  or  the  continuance  of 

the  action  or  of  the  state  resulting;  from  an  action. 


58  ETYMOLOGY.  §  91 . 

3.  For  comlitional  and  indirect  assertion,  or  for  tlie  Coiid/h'uUd/  and 
Siihjni)  ■th'e  ALood  of  Enropean  langnages,  we  have  not  to  state  pecu- 
liar forms,  besides  those  of  the  Indicative,  —  the  condition  or  suppo- 
sition being  expressed  by  separate  })articles  which  are  conveniently 
reckoned  among  the  conjunctions.   Cf.  §  255,  .'1 '276  — 27S. 

4.  Only  one  furin  mentions  an  action  in  the  form  not  of  an  asser- 
tion, but  of  a  mere  conception,  as  the  expected  or  intended,  natural 
or  usual   consequence  of  a  previous  action.  See  §91,  8. 

5.  Tlie  l}))perative  Mood  has  iiro  forms,  one  for  a  direct  (seldom 
indirect)  command  (or  wish,  petition,  warning,  forbiddance)  to  the  2d 
pers.  sing.,  used  without  any  prefix  (except  the  negative),  also  without 
its  pronoun,  and  another  with  pronominal  and  nasal  prefixes  for  the 
indirect  command  to  the  1st  pers.  sing,  and  plur.  and  sometimes  the 
2d  pers.  sing.,  and  for  the  direct  and  indirect  command  to  the  2d  pers. 
plur.  and  the  3d  pers.  sing,  and  plur. 

6.  Questions  ai'c  asked  by  the  same  forms  (including  those  of  the 
Imperative),  usually  with  the  addition  of  interrogative  pronouns  or 
particles.  §  153. 

Ol,  The  (en  forms  mentioned  in  §  90,  2.  4.  5:  are  distinguished 
by  the  following  names  and  characteristics: 

(We  give  as  examples,  also  regarding  the  tone,  verbs  of  one  and  two 
syllables,   with  the  prefix  of  the  3d  pers.  sing.)   Of.  §  165-182. 

1.  The  Present  tense  marks  doing  or  being  in  the  present  time,  at 
any  indefinite  time,  or  at  all  times.  The  stem  is  in  its  bare  form,  i  e. 
without  any  prefix  (except  the  pronominal  and  the  negative,  prefix,  §92). 

ofjY,  ]ie  takes;  obis  a,  Jie  asks. 

2.  The  Conti'nuative  form  marks  continuance  of  (active  or  inactive) 
state  in  the  present  or  past  time.  It  is  distinguished  from  the,  present 
by  its  different  tone;  sometimes,  especially  in  reduplication,  it  has  the 
palatal  suffix.  Cf.  §103. 

owo,  lie  Juts   or  had:  okura,  okurae,  Jie  liolds  or  held. 

3.  The  Preterit  tense  marks  action  performed  in  the  past  time.  It 
is  distinguished  from  the  present  by  the  tone,  and  by  the  palatal  suffix, 
which,  when  followed  by  an  object,  is  dropped  and  compensated  by 
the   lengthening  of  the  final  vowel. 

ofae,  lie  took  (it);  obisae,  Itc  asked; 
of  a  a  no,  he  took  him;  obisaa  no,  he  asked  him. 
In   the   negative  form,  we  frequently    find  the  A'owel  e  a})})ended  to 
the   verb   or   at  the  end  of  the  sentence.  §  170. 

4.  The  Perfect  tense  marks  action   completed  in  the  past  time,  but 


§  91 .  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  59 

whose  result  is  present  as  a  state,    or   whose  coiise((uences  extend   to 
the  present  time.  It  is  formed  by  the  prefix  a-, 
wafa,  he  has  taken;  wabisa,  he  has  asked. 
r>.  The  Progressive  form  marks  action  in  the  progress  of  performance. 
It  is  formed  by  the  prefix  re-. 

grefa  (orefa),  he  is  takinfj ;  orebisa,  he  is  askituj. 
('».   Tlie  first  Future  marks  action  in  the  time  to  come. 
It  is  formed  by  the  prefix  be-  (be-): 

obefa,  he  icill  take;  obebisa,  lie  irill  ask. 
The  prefixes  of  the   1st  pers.  sinp;.  mebe-  are  contracted   into  m  e- : 
mefa,  1  shad  taJce ;  mebisa,  /  shall  ask. 
1.  The  second  Future,  or  Fat.  proximate,  marks  action  in  the  next 
future.     It  is  formed  by  the  prefixes  rebe-. 

g'rebefa,  —  orebebisa,  he  ivill  take  —  ask  —  in  the  next  time. 

8.  The  Consecutire  form  marks  an  action  which  is  consecutive  to 
another  action,  as  the  expected  or  intended  result  from  it,  or  as  merely 
following  after  it. 

It  is  formed  by  the  ])rcfi.i:  a-,  like  the  Perfect,  but  witli  different  tones, 
na  wafti,   —   na  wabisa,   ///((/  tite  man  tcke,   —  ask. 

9.  The  first  Imperative  form  marks  an  action  desired  by  the  spea- 
ker to  be  done  by  the  addressed  person.  It  has  no  prefix,  not  even  the 
pronominal. 

fa!  take!  fa  no,  take  him',  bisa!  ask!  bis  a  no,  ask  him. 

10.  The  second  Imperative  form  marks  an  action  which  some  other 
subject  desires  to  be  done  by  the  subject  of  the  verb  (in  the  1st  or  3d 
pers.  sing,  or  plur.  or  2d  pers.  plur.)  It  is  formed  by  the  nasal  prefix, 
(§18)  and  has  high  tone  on  the  prefixes  and  the  first  syllable  of  the  stem, 

omfa,  lie  shall  take;  ommisa,  he  shall  ask. 
In  the  2d  imperative,  preceded  by   the  1st  imp.  of  ma  (which  form 
is  called  the  compound  imperative,  of.  §  107,  25  Rem.),  the  prefixes  have 
low  tone;  but  after  the  2d  imp.  of  ma,  they  have  hi<)lb  tone,  as  in  the 
simple  form. 

Ma  omfa,  let  him  take;  ma  ommisa,  let  liim  ask! 
momma  omfa,  let  (pi.)  hifu  take;  momma  ommisa,  let  (pi.)  him  ask. 
omma  yemfa,  maj/  fie  let  us  take;  memma  mom  fa?  sltall  1  let  you  t? 
worn  ma  mimmisa,  may  tliey  let  me  asJc. 
yemma  wummisa?  sliall  we  let  tJiee  ask? 

Hem.  The  accented  syllable  is  the  first  high-toned   syllable  of  any 
verbal  form,   with  the  following  exceptions: 
a.  the  low-toned  pronoun  has  the  stress  in  the-  forms  2.  .">.  fi. 
h.  in  disyllabic  verbs  the  first  syllable  of  the  stem,  tliougli  low-toned, 

has  the  stress  in  the  affirmative  forms  1 .  5.  8. 9. 


60 


ETYMOLOGY. 


§  92-95. 


Oilier  (l/'sl/iicHona  of  iJie  smuc  j'onns. 

1>2.  All  these  forms  are  used  cither  iu  the  af/lnihil/rc  or  in  the 
liCfldt/vc  ivaif.  The  Nt'fjatirc  is  uiiexcejttionally  tunned  by  the  iidsat 
prel'iM  (m-,  n-,  I'l-,  according  to  §  1 8).  From  the  negative  Present,  the 
2d  Imp.  (§  01,  ]())  is  distinguished  by  the  tone,  and,  when  negative, 
by  the  doubling  of  the  nasal  prefix. 

OS.  Most  of  these  forms  have  additional  /it<iressii'e  funiis.,  express- 
ing a   previous  going  or  coming  for  the  p(!rformancc.  See  §  96.  1U7  (11). 

04.  All  these  forms  (§  91-93)  have  different  tones  in  the  iiidepcih 
dt'id  and  in  the  connected  form.  See  §  97.  112. 

Evcu)ij)les. 
0»>.    The    following    examples    show    the    ten    forms    (§91)    iu    the 
affirmative  and  negative  way  (§  92)  in  the  independent  position  (§  94) 
of  some  verbs : 

1.   ba,  lo  coitte.  (The  Imp.  affirmative  has  exceptionally  an  'r'  inserted). 


Affirnnitive. 

1.  Pres.  ohh,  lie  comes 

2.  Cont.  owg  ha,  lie  is  here 

3.  Pret.  gbae,  he  came 

obdfi  ha,  he  came  here 

4.  l*erf.  wdba,  he  is  come 

5.  Frofjr.  oreba,  he  is  cOmiiKf 

6.  Fid.  I.  obeba,  he  will  come 

7.  Fid.  II.  grebeba,    id.    (directly) 

8.  Consec.  na  waba,  that  he  muy  c. 

9.  Imp.  I.  be'ra!  come'. 

10.  Imp.  IF  ommera!  he  shall  come! 
Coinj).  Imp.  ma.  gmmera,  1  let  him 
momma  gmmerfi,    )  come! 


Negative. 
omnia,  lie  does  not  come 
onni  ha,  he  is  not  here 
gmmae(e),  he  has  not  (yet)  come 
gmmaa  ha(e)  he  has  not  come  here 
wamma,  he  has  not  come 
gremma,  he  mil  not  come 
gmmeba,  gmm'ma,     id. 
(oremmebti,  id.) 

..  na   wamma,   tliat  the  may  not  c. 
mma!  do  not  rome! 
gmmma!  he  shall  not  come! 
mma    gmmma,   momm'ma  gmmma, 
do  not  let  him  come! 


2.  Kg,  to  I/O.    (The  forms  2-4  show  souk;  peculiarities  of  meaning.) 


1.  Fres.  gkg,  he  poes 

2.  Cont.  gkg,  he  is  away 

3.  Fret,  gkge,  gkgre,  he  went  away, 

gkgg  ho,  he  went  there 

4.  Ferf.  wakg,  he  has  cjone  or  heen 

5.  Fro'ir.  grekg,  he  is  going 

6.  Fnt.  J.  gbekg,  he  will  go 

7.  Fat.  II.  grebeko,  id.  (forthwith,  directly) 

8.  Consec.  na  wako,  that  he  may  go  \  na  wahkg,  that  lie  may  not  go 

9.  Imp.  I.kol  go!  kohol  go  there!  j  nkg!  do  not  go! 
10.  Imp.  II.  gnkg!  he  shall  gol       i  gnnkg!  he  shall  not  go! 


oil  kg,  he  does  not  go  (away,  or,  to 
some  i)lace.  exprfssed  or  understood). 
ghkge(e),  he  did  not  (yet)  go 
giikgg  h6(e)  he  did  not  go  there 
wankg,  he  1ms  not  gone 
greiiko,  he  will  not  go 
g  nil  kg,  id. 


Comp.  Imp.  ma  gnkg 
momma  gnkg  ^j 


let  him  gol 


mma  gnnkg 
momnVmii  giiiikg  ^j 


let  him  not  go! 


96. 


THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH. 


61 


3.  ye,  to  do,  muJce,  hecome,  f/roic,  Contin.  to  he,  connected  wltli  a  noun. 


1 ,  O'ye  ade,  he  does  somelh/n;i 

2.  oye  onipa,  he  ?V  a  vuui 
:j.  gyee,  he  dit  (if) 

oyee  ade,  he  did  somelhin'i 

4.  waye  ade,  he  hds  done  s.th. 

5.  oreye  ade,  he  is  doiiifi  s.th.. 

6.  obeye  ade,  he  will  do  s.th. 

7.  orebeye  ade,  ....  (forth/ritli) 
8  na  waye  ade,  tJtat  he  ivmj  do  s.th. 
9.  ye!  do  (it)!  ye  ade  no!  do  tliiit! 

10.  onye  ade  no!  he  shall  do  tJiat! 

9.  ma  onye   ade  no     |  let  Jiiilt 
10.  momma,  onye  a.  n.  f  do  that! 


Onye  ade  no,  lie  does  not  do  tlidt 
onye  aboa,  he  is  not  a  heust 
onyee,  Jie  did  not  do  (it) 
onyee  ade  no  e,  he  has  not  yet  done  it 
wanye  ade  no,  Ji,e  has  not  done  it 

Qveny^  '-^^e  »«  I  7,6  ^,/// llO^/o  ^//,ai 
onn  ye     „       „  I 

na  wanye  ade  no,  that  he  may  not... 
nye  ade  no!   do)it  do  tlmt! 
onnye  ade  no!  he  six  ill  not  do  tJial! 
mmii  onnye  ade  no  i  dont  let 
momnrma   onnye..  J  Jiini  do  it! 

4.  gn,  /o  Crts/ (Contin.  to  lie)  and  its  reduplication  gugn,  the  latter 
sJiowing  the  tones  of  a  disyllabic  verb  by  the  side  of  a  moiiosyllable, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  prefix  n-   before  g). 

5.  snsnw,  to  measure,  think,  shows  likewise  the  tone  of  disyllables 
and,  by  the  mark  after  w,  the  cases  in  which  trisyllables  and  poly- 
syllables assume  low  tone;  e.  g.  1.  wgpatipatiriw,  they  slip  repeatedly. 

1 .  O'gii        ogugu  osusuw'  onih'i  onnugii 

2.  egu  cgugu  enriu  ennugu 
8.  ogui        ogugui          osusuwl            oiinui  onnugui 

4.  wiigu       wagugu  wasusuw"  wai'n'u'i  wai'ii'nigvi 

5.  oregii      oregugu  oresusuw"  oreni'ni  orei'ihugu 

6.  obegu     obegugu  obesusuw  oniri'ii'i  oniVnugu 

7.  orcbegu  orebegugu  orehesusuw 

8.  na  wagu- wagugii  -wasu.suw'    I  na  waiinii  -  wannugu 

9.  gu!  (gumo!)  gugu!  susuw  !  nhu!  nnugi'i! 
10.  oni'iu!     oi'inugu!  onsusiiw  onnnu!  onnnugu! 

9.  mj\ohnu!maoniiugu! -onsusnw!     mma 
10.  momma  onnu -oiuiugu-onsusuw!  \  m6mm'm;n  — onnsusuwM 

06.  The  inyressive  forms  have  the  prefix  be-  or  ko-  (be-  or  ko-), 
expressive  of  coming  or  going;  they  are  either  (a)  preceded  by  the 
corresponding  verb  ba,  to  come,  or  k  o,  to  (/o,  in  wliich  case  the  pro- 
noun is  repeated  only  in  the  1st  pers.  sing.,  or  (h)  the  coming  or  going 
for  the  performance  of  the  action  is  expressed  only  by  the  prej'ix  of 
the  ingressivc  form.  (This  prefix  must  not  be  confounded  with  that  of 
the  Future  tense;  the  tone  is  different  in  obefa,  but  not  in  orebefa.) 

a.  Oba  {or  orebA)  abefa  n'ade,  |  he  comes  (or  is  comin(f)  to  take  hi.9  things 

h.  (Jbefa  {or  orebefa)  n'ade,     j  (or,  his  property). 

a.  Meko  (or  mereko)  makofa  me  ba,  I    j        ,         ,    ,,  •    a  ^„ /,,7.^  ..,      77,; 
,  ■    ,  ,    },  ,  %■   iw,      ,  ,  ,  7  (]o  (or  am  (O/.na   to  talce  m/j  child. 

I).  Mekgta  (or  merekora)  me  ba,        \      ■      ^  '        ' 

Exclndins:    the    continuative    form .    of  whicli    no  ingressive    form  is 


onsusuw 

onsusiiwi 
wansusx'iw' 
orensusuw' 
onn  snsnw' 

-  wansusuw' 
n susuw ! 
oinisusiiw' ! 


onnnu  -onnugu 


62 


ETYMOLOGY. 


§97. 


possible,    the   t'ollowiiig-   examples    show    the   iiKiressive  form   of  the   9 
remaining  principal  forms, 

I,  in  the  Afllnvadrc,  II,  in  the  Negalire; 
a.   combined  with    ba  or  ko,   h.  by   itself. 
1,  Ex.  of  monosyllables:  tu,  to  pull  out. 


(a)betu,      !   obetii 
be  till,        obetiVi 


abeti'i. 


la 
1.  oba 

3.  gba' 

4.  waba 

5.  oreba  „ 
G.  obeba           „ 

7.  grebeba        „ 

8.  (na)  waba    „ 

9.  bera  beta ! 
10.  ommera    mmetu! 


wabetu 
orebetu 


..wabetu 
beta ! 
ommetii ! 


l\a. 

omnia         mmetii, 
omnia'        nimeti'ii, 
wamma     ammetii, 
oremma     mmetu. 


..wamma  ammetu, 
nima  mmetu! 

omniin;i     mmmetu! 


11/;. 

ommeti'i 
ommetiu 
wanimeti'i 
oremmetu 


..  wammeti'i! 
mmetu! 
ommmetu ! 


2.  Ex.  of  disyllables  :  tutu,  redupl.  of  tu,  to  pull  out. 


la. 

1.  oko       (a)k6tutii 

3.  gko'  kotutui 

4.  wakg       akotutu 

5.  grekg  „ 

6.  gbekg  „ 

7.  grebekg  „ 

8.  (na)wakg       „ 

9.  ko  kotutu! 
10.  ohko       n kotutu! 


Ih. 
okoti'itu 
okotuti'ii 
wakotutu 
orekotutu 


..wakotutu 
kotutu ! 
oi'i  kotutu! 


oh  kg 
ghk(y 
wan  kg 
orehku 


II(^. 
h  kotutu, 
h kotutui 
ahkotutu 
h kotutu 


..wahkg     ahkotutu 
hkg  h  kotutu! 

ohhko        hh  kotutu! 


llh. 
ohkotiitu 
ohkotiitui 
w  ahkotutu 
oren kotutu 


..wahkotixtu 
h kotutu  ! 
oh  h kotutu ! 


97.  I'he  coitneded  fonas  (used  e.  g.  after  the  relative  particle  a 
in  adjective  sentences  §  257)  are  different  in  tone  from  the  indepen- 
dent forms. 

1.  Pren.  gye  a  gye  a.  s.  gnye,  a  doing  ivlikli  lie  does  or  does  not. 

2.  Cont.  obene  a  gye  a.  s.  gnye,  a  kiiKjlthat  lie  is  or  h  not. 

3.  l^ret.  ade  a  gyee  a.  s.  gnyee,  a  tiling  tvhicli  lie  did  or  did  not. 

4.  Ferf.    „      „  waye     „     wanye,  a.  lit.  tcli.  he  has  or  has  not  done. 

5.  Frogr.  „     „   greye  -  grenye,  a.  ih.  icli.  he  is  or  is  not  doing. 

6.  Fut.  7.  „     „  gbeye  -  gnnye,  a.  th.  wli.  he  will  or  will  not  do. 

7.  „  ii.  „      „    grebeye-gremmeye,   (ditto  in  the  next  future.) 

8.  Consec.  e.  g.  gbesah  aye,  he  will  return  to  do=he  ivill  do  it  again. 

9.  Imp.  I.  nea  gkri  se  ye  no,  what  he  says^tlwu  shalt  do, 

,,      „  nye  no,       „       „        „         „         „       not  do. 
10.  Imp.  II.  nea  ose  gnye  no,  ivliat  he  says  he  shall  do, 

„  gnn  ye  no,      „       „       „       ^         „     not  do. 

We  observe  in  most  cases,  that  in  the  connected  form 

1 .  low  tones  after  high  tones  become  middle,  and 

2.  low  tones  before  high  tones  become  high,  with  the  effect  that  succee- 
ding high  tone  frequently  becomes  middle.  —  It  would  lead  too  far, 
to  repeat  all  the  forms  contained   in  §  95.  9G.  in  the  connected   iorm. 


§98. 


THE    PARTS   OF    SPEECH. 


63 


1)H.  A  Hy)iopliral  View  of  iJie  Ten  Principal  Forms 
in  tho  independent  font/  of  tlie  Affirnuiiive  (I)  and  Ne'jntire  (Ilj, 
;uid  ill  the  ronnecled  fortn  of  ditto  (III.  IV). 

A.  In  Fiijures^  bftfoi-e  the  comma  denoting  the  tones  of  the  prefixes, 
after  it,  those  of  the  stems.*) 


a.  IV all  nionosyllahic  stems: 


h.  with  disyllahii-  stems. 


I.     III. 

11. 

IV. 

I.               III. 

II. 

IV. 

1.       3,1   —     3,2 

1,3  - 

31,3 

-     3,2 

1      1,13  —     1,33 

1       3,13               3,22 

1,1.3- 

3,13 

3,13 

2.       1,1   —   i3,3 
3,1           il,3 

do. 

Tl      H 

1,11    —       3,31 
3,1  1 

1,31   — 

3,31 

3,33 

».       1,31—     3,32 

3,31 

1,31- 

31,31 

-     3,32 

1,131—  3,332 

3.131 

1,131  — 

3,131 

3,332 

4.       3,1   —     3,2 

1,3    - 
3,2 

-     .3,2 

1,.33  —     .3,.33 

3,22                3.22 

1,13— 
3,18 

3,13 

5.      13,1(11,3)33,2 

33,1    31,3 

31,3  - 

-  33,2 

11,13  —  33,33 

81,13 

31,13  — 

33,13 

fi      13,3  —  13,3 

33,3             33  3 

V    n 

V     „ 

13,31   —   13,32 

33,31             33,32 

«           Tl 

r,        n 

1.  111,3  —333,3 

3  1  1,3 

311,3  - 

-331,3 

111,31   —333,32 

311  .31 

311,31  — 

331,32 

8.       1,3  —     3,2 

3,2 

1,3   - 

3,2 

-     3,2 

1,13  —     .3,13 

3    13 

1,1.3- 

3,13 

3,13 

9.          3(1)         3 

1,3  - 

-     1,3 

11  —        33 

1,13— 

1,13 

10.       3,3(1,3)   3,3 

1,3  - 

-  31,3   ' 

3,31(1,31)3,32 

1,13  — 

31,13. 

*)  The  smaller  figures  denote  the  tones  of  the  21  pers.  sing,  an  1  pliir. 
in  those  cases  in  which  the  tones  of  the  pronominal  prefixes,  and  some 
times  of  the  succeeding  stem,  difi'er  from  those  of  the  1st  and  3d  jiersons. 
§  S9,.'j.  E.  g.  II.  1.  mintii.  wun'tu ;   3.  yentui,   munti'ii. 

Jj.  In  Fxamples:   tu,  to  p nil  out;  tua,  to  put  or  fix  (sotnewJiereJ; 
for  the  contin.  form:  so,  to  he  small;  kura,  to  Jiold,  liare  in  hands. 


la. 

Ih. 

Ila. 

Uh. 

1. 

6  til 

otuti 

ontu 

ontui'i 

2. 

oso 

okura 

on  so 

oh kura 

3. 

otiu 

otui'ie 

ontui 

ontuae 

4. 

watu 

watu  a 

wantu 

t)-  tua 

5. 

oretu 

oretu. I 

orentu 

-tua 

6. 

obetu 

■^)-tua 

onu'tu 

-tua 

7. 

orebetii 

—  tua 

oremmetu 

-tua 

K. 

(na)  watu 

-tua 

(na)  wantu 

—  tua 

9. 

tu!   tu  1 

lol      tua! 

ntu ! 

ntu  a  ! 

10. 

»')ntu ! 

-  tua ! 

onntu! 

-tua! 

^)  The  hyphen  hd'ore  tua  replaces  those  prefixes  which  are  tlie  same 
in  sounds  and  tones  as  before  tu,  eg.  in  form  7:  orebeti'ia,  nrem- 
metufi,  and  on  pag.  Gl.,  nea  orebetua,  nea  oremmetua. 


64 

ETYMOLOGY. 

§* 

nia. 

II  Fa 

IV((. 

l\h. 

1. 

(noa)       otu 

otua 

(noa) 

until 

OUtUi'l 

1. 

gs6 

okura 

„ 

on  so 

onkura 

:1 

otiii 

otuae 

„ 

(UltUl 

ontuae 

4. 

„         vvatu 

watua 

„ 

wunti'i 

-  tua 

5. 

„       (uetu 

—  tua 

„ 

oreiitu 

-  tua 

r>. 

„       obetu 

-  tua 

^ 

onnti'i 

-  tiui 

7. 

„   oi'cbctii 

-tua 

^    (h-emnietu 

-  tua 

8. 

(na)   watu 

-  tua 

(na) 

wantii 

-  tiui 

1» 

nea  oka  se  tii 

. . .  tua 

utii 

. , , ntua 

10. 

(nea)  ontu 

-  tua. 

(nea) 

onnti'i 

-til  a. 

llednplkatiou  of  Verh^. 
(Iterative  and  frequentative- forms.) 

'   90,    1.  Almost   all   verbs    may    be    doubled,    some    even  twice,    to 
^  denote  a  successive    or  a  simultaneous  frequency  of  action,  viz. 
a.  a  plurality  or  repetition  of  actions^  or 
/;.  a  plurality  of  the  sultject,  or 
C.  a  plurality  of  the  ohjecf  or  other  complement. 

teem',  to  cry  out  (once);    teeteem',  to  cry  out  (repeatedly); 

w  u,  to  die  (of  one  or  several  persons);  wuwu,  to  die  (in  numbers). 

bo,  to  heat,  hreak;  bo  bo,  to  knock  repeatedly,  to  break  into  many 

pieces,  to  shatter;  to  break  many  thimjs  (e.g.  pots), 
bu,  to  bend,  break;  bubu,  to  bend  or  break  a  tlniaj  in  many  places; 

to  break  many  thinfis  (e.g.  sticks). 
nno  gugu  fani',  palm-oil  is  spilt  on  various  spots  on  the  (jronnd. 

2.  Sometimes  even  the  simple  verb  denotes  an  action  which  is  a 
complex  of  repeated  subordinate  actions;  but  a  reduplicative  form  may 
exist  beside  the  simple  one,   and  each  of  them  may  have  its  proper  use: 

di  and  didi,  to  eat;  di  is  used  ailh  an  object,  didi,  n-ithout.  202,2.4. 

horo,  to  H'asJh  (clothes);  ho  ho,  to  wash  (the  face,  hands,  feet);  hohoro 

(kuruwam',  tirim),  to  u^ash  (the  inside  of  a  vessel,  one's  head). 

3.  Some  verbs  assume  a  somewhat  different  meanincf  by  reduplication  : 
f\ve,  to  look  at,  fwefwe,  to  seek,  to  look  for; 

pono,  to  bend.  pompono,  to  wrinkle; 

si,  to  place,  puL  sisi,  to  deceive; 

sie,  to  lay  up,  preserve,  siesie,  to  put  in  order,  ar ramie. 

4.  Some  verbs  are  no  more  used  in  their  simple,  but  only  in  their 
reduplicated  form: 

dada,  lo  deceive,  nwinwi,  lo  murmur,  susuw,  to  measure,  think. 

5.  On  the  form  of  reduplication,  see  §  29,  4. 

G.  By  reduplication,  monosyllabic  verbs  become  disyllabic,  also  in 
tone,  and  disyllabic  (and  trisyllabic)  verbs  become  trisyllabic  or  poly- 
syllabic. 


§  100.  101.  THE   PARTS  OF    SPEECH.  65 

liHh  'V\\o,  lone  of  IrisjiUahii',  and  poljisiillahic  rcrh^!  follows  tliat  of 
dissyllables,  the  3(1,  4tli  and  fjtli  syllables  usually  sinking  into  low  tones, 
t hough  the  2d  syllable  have  high  toue,  as  has  l)oeii  indicated  in  the 
Ncrb   susuw,   given  as  an  example   in  §  Do,  5. 

E.g.   ne  kaw  adore,  his  deht  lias  increased \ 

n'akaw'  ado  dove  or  a<li)dododore,  Ids  dehls  have  in  -reiisfd. 

Di/ferenl  lone  and  reditplicafed  form  of  rcrlain  verbs. 
lOl.  1.  Certain  monosyltabir  verbs  are  like  dissyllahlcs  in  tone,   \\a. 
all   verbs  that    have  a   long  vowel  or  a  diphthong  with   jialatal   tcnni- 
nation,   and    part  of  the  verbs  ending  in   m   or  h.   §  28,  ;3.  .'I  1. .'.. 

E.  g.  ota'  no,  h,e  perse^ules  him;  gsee  no,  he  spoils  hiiii; 

onTin'   dade,  he  mclls  iron.     See  11  examples  in  ."..  1.  II. 

2.  (!ertain  dissijUahi ■  verbs  are  like  nnjnosyllahles  in  tone,  \va.  part 
nf  those  in  which  the  vowel-part  is  augmented  by  an  accessory  syllable 
beginning  with   r  or  n   (§  28,  ."3,7.),   of  the  forms: 

are,  ane,   ere,   ore;   ere,   ene,   iri,  ini;   ore,  o  n  o,    ui'ii,    iinii. 
E.g.  ohare  korow,  he  rows  a  canoe:  akoko  kwane,  ilh'  hen  '-a r^l (■.',■ -^ 
oforo  dua,  he  climbs  a  tree.  See  6  examples  in  ."!.  I.  I. 

.'>.  Several  pairs  of  verbs  exist,  which  contain  the  same  Ivtt'i-s.  but 
are,   notwithstanding,  as  of  different  meaning,   so  of  different   tune. 

The  following  list  shows  1.  a  erbs  with  the  tone  of  monosvllables,  II.  \  crlis 
with  (li(>  tone  of  dissyllables,  a.  in  the  simjde,  h.  in  the  redu])licate(l  I'oini. 

\a.  lb.  Ua.  Uh 

odan,  he  ajjjjlies  lo,       dennaii;  gdaiV,  he   liirns,  dan'nau. 

odoi'i,  Jfe  soah'S.  donnoii;  odoii' ,]/e  n'tdks  (i/fe-ledh/.  '\<n\'unu. 

eguaii,  it   ivilhers  gnniniaii  ;  oguai'i',  lie  (Ices.  giian'iiuan. 

ohybn  Jieblon^s{n\u)Y\\)  hyeiihyt'ii ;  ohyeiV,  he  eiders.  hyen'hyeii. 

enyan,  //  (jels  sour,       nyinnyaii ;  onyaiV,  he  awakes,  nyan'nyaii. 

gpfim,  he  sews,   ioins,    pompam;  opam',  ]ie  drives  fnr.ii/.  pam'jtain. 

gsan,  he  draws  a  line,  sen.saii:  osaiV,  lie  infe-ls.  san'saii. 

ofere,  he  swin'js,  fefere;  ofere,  lie  shuns,  f(  re  fere, 

opcre,  lie  ()Oes  aloii'i.     pepere:  gpere,  he  defends.  perei)ere. 

('isore,   he  prays,  sosore  ;  osore,   lii'   rises,  soresi'ire. 

nware,   he  is  loiij,   tall,  wbware:  owar*',   he   marrii's.  wai-(' w.'ire. 

I.  Similar  \erbs,  in  which  there  is  a  difference  of  singli'  suniids, 
Id'sides   that    of  tone,    are; 

1".  \b.  11.-/.  11/;. 

elian,   /'  (jels  louse,  lienhAi'i;         oliaiV.   //'   aliens,  h;n'ri:a:'i. 

(ihnaii,    Jie  disjoiiils.         huiihnan  ;      ohuaiV   he  jieels.  iei.iiVhriau. 

oj)riin,  he  core  II  a  ids,  cf.  i'»pam  (in  ;^.);  osaiV,  he  loosens,  cf.  osan'  (in  :!.  al»(i\  e  i. 
nsiaii,   he  re<-<jils.  sinsiaii  :        osifiiV,  he  des'-eiids.  sian'sian. 

('diiirn,   //   boils,  Imluirti:        (dnni'iw",   hr  jumps,  linnihhrn'x  . 

otiini,  ///'  carries  (^a  cliild  i  tuti'irn  ;       etiin'iti'ini  w,  //  hiirsis  m-  ///r.s  off  in 

sihidl  jj<nii'-lrs. 


o 


66  ETYMOLOGY.  §  102. 

Verhs  used  in  the  CouiintutUre  Form. 

103.  Not  all  verbs  have  a  contimiative  form;  but  there  are  verbs 
that  are  only  nsed  in  this  form,  and  have  none  besides. 

The  latter  are  partly  correlatives  of  verbs  having  no  coiitin native 
form,  both   of  them  mutually  fillinu'  up  their  deficiencies. 

We  give  a  list  of  the  verbs  used  in  this  form,  adding  some  remarks 
and  examples,  and  marking  those ,  that  have  no  other  form  besides, 
with  an  asterisc. 

1.  Substantive  verbs,  denoting  exislenrc  and  requiring  a  comple- 
ment of  distinction,  quality,  or  number  (a  noun,  pronoun,  adjective 
or  numeral  in  the  nominative) : 

'■^ne,  to  he  (identical  icilJiJ,  to  consist  in. 
ye,  to  he  (to  have  the  qualify  or  function  of). 
si,  gu,  nam,  to  he  (existing  ov  ji resent  in  the  nnwhcr  of). 

2.  Verbs  that  denote  a  state  of  holdiwj  or  possessing^  and  rccpiii-c 
a  passive  ohject: 

wo,  to  have,  to  he  in  the  possession   of;  Neg.  nni  (from   di): 

correl.  nya,  to  get. 
de,  to  hold,  have  (in  hand,  in  thought),  possess; 

correl.  fa,  to  taJce  (also  for  the  neg.). 
kxira,  to  have,  hold,  contain;  kita,  fua,   to  hare  (in  hand). 
se,  siane,  to  have  hanging  ahonl,  lo  /rear. 
bo,  to  have  fastened  ahont,  to  wear. 
fura    (otam,  ntama),    hye  (atade,  kyew),    mo  (amOase),  lit   wear 

(a  country-cloth:,  a  garment,  a  hat-,  a  waist-cloth). 
*so,  to  have  on  the  head,  to  carry;  correl.  so  a,  to  carry. 

turn,  to  have  (a  child)  on  the  arm  or  hacli,  to  carry. 
*nim,  Ak.  ni,  F.  nyim,  (to  hare  in  one's  head  ov  mind.)  In  hno/r: 

correl.  h  u,  Ak.  liunu,  to  see. 
Hem.   Most  of  these  Aerbs  may  also  occasionally  have  the  thing  pos- 
sessed, held,   worn,  as  their  suhject;  e.  g. 
mewg  odan  bi,  I  have  a  house; 
odan  yi  wo  me,  this  house  helongs  to  we; 
a  wow  deno,  cold  seii:es  hiw,  \.o.  he  is  (feels)  cold: 
okura  poma,  or,  poma  kura  ne  nsam\  he  has  a  sli'JcinhisJiand; 
ohye  mpaboa,  or,  mpabod  hyehye  n'anan,  he  wears  sandtds. 

3.  Verbs  that  denote  existence  in  a  place  (in  general,  or  in  iiai-ticu- 
lar  situations),  and  require  a  complement  of  place: 

*wo,  to  he  somewliere;  neg.  nni;  con-el.   ba,  to  come,   ko,  to  go. 
fi,  to  helong  io  a  place,  to  have  ones  origin  from: 

wabefi  ho,  he  has  appeared  or  emerged  there. 
■"te,  to  sit,  live;  correl.  trii,  tena,  to  sit. 
»     da,  gu,  bew,  bea,  boa,  sam,  butuw,  to  lie. 

ta,  bum,  to  sit;  kotow,  to  squat,  sit  cowering,  Imccl. 
gyina,  si,  to  stand;  si,  to  penh  (of  birds);  tweri.  to  lean. 


§  103.  104.  THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  67 

li  y  e,   t  i  m ,  t u  a,   lo  st/ijc ;  sen,   s i  a ii  o,   k  o  ii  k  o  u ,  lo  h a )i(f. 
sa,  in  ant  am,   to  he  fastened  somewhere, 
san,  to  he  drawn  (of  a  line); 

etwa  san   n'ani  a  so,   a  scar  rrosses  Ins  cliceh. 

'Jlie  following  verbs   iin[)ly   u/ol/on  in   a  j)t(i'c: 

tone  (farn),  to  rreep  (ilo)i(i :  ten  (ani),  to  float,  he  a/loat;  sen,  to  jlon", 

-nam,   to  walk :  correl    nan  tew,  to  walk  (used    witliont  reference  to  a 

f»lace) ;  fa,  to  takf  (a  road,  a  turn,   used  with  a  complement  of  ]dace). 

The  verbs  sen   and   nam   may   also   be  used    without   a  complcmfiit 

(if  place. 

4.  Verbs  that  denote  a  niode  of  ei:is'en-e  or  a  (find/ly: 
■"^te,  to  he   (in   some  state);  it   wants  a   comjilemcnt   of  manner. 

see  §21').   (Jorrel.  ye,  to  he  owe. 
*ye,  to  he  <iood;  correl.  expression:  ye  y  i  y  o. 
*mn(7),  to  he  1>ad\  correl.  expression:  ye  bone. 
so,  tt)  he  lai'iie:  sua,   lo  he  sniill :  ware,   to  hi'  loirj. 
Some   dissyllabic  ^■erbs  denoting  ([uality   have  the  tone   ol    ihc  ju'cscnt 
tense: 

here,  to  he  red'   biri,  to  he  hi  ark;  boa,  to  he  n-fiife: 
terew,  to  he  hroad.  n'/'ile. 

f).   Verbs   that   denote   a   s!a'e   im])lying  ruD/juir/'son  : 
s  e,  lo  he  fit,  e</nal,  alike:  si-ii,  kyen,  boro,  to  surjiass,  he  more  lhan\ 
so  no,  to  he  different:  fanim,   lo  he  less  had. 

(These  two   are  used   with   an    impersonal   pronoun,   see  §  l.'iT,  "J.) 
0.    Verbs  that  denote  a  slate  of  niind  concerning  an    oliject: 
]te,  do,  to  like,  to  love:  kyi,  tan,  to  detest,  to  fiate. 
.\fark   these   differences:   odo  no,  fie  lores  fiint  (iilirays.   lOn'innallip: 
odo  no,  fie  lores  fiini  (now  aiidtfien):  odoo  no,  fie  tared,  tiim  (fornierlif). 

10»S.  'i  he  continuati\e  I'orm  li.-is  sometimes,  in  sonn-  of  tlu-se  verUs 
(§102),  espec.  in  redujdication.  the  jjalalul  siiffi  r.  like  the  pi-cterit 
lense,   but   with   different   tone;   e.g. 

woyivei,   wososoe,    wosusfiae,    w  o  w  o  w  a  r  ee,    wnsesee, 
Ifiey  are  ijood.  lar/je,  small,  loir',  ff/iml. 

Infmilire  Mood.     Verhal  Xoiiii. 

104.  The  infinitive  mood,  called  so  because  it  exjui  sscs  ,\n  a-lioii 
or  state  in  its  most  general  or  indefinite  meaning  (not  conliiic  I  to  ;;ii 
agent,  in   Tshi   also   not   to   time),    is   a   \crb    con\erted    into   a    noun. 

Ilcm.  Whilst  in  English,  e.  g.  of  the  verb  to  die,  we  Ikinc  dift'erent 
forms,  viz.  the  proper  infinitive,  in  '"'let  fiini  die.  J  irisli  lo  ilii\-''  — 
the  gerund,  in  "Sfiall  n'e  he  ronsnnied  witfi  di/in;f:^-^  Xiiiid/  J7,  VI. 
,2  Cor.  4,  JO.  —  and  the  verbal  noun  dralli  :  there  is  no  decidid  dif 
ference  in  Tshi  Ix'tween  tlie  forms  of  the  iiiliuiti\c  and  those  nf  (.tiier 
verl)al   nouns,    which    e\eii    pass  o\('r    into   conciete    nouns. 


68  ETYMOLOGY.  §  105. 

'VUc  infinitive  is  Ibrmed  from  tlie  stem 

1.  liy  tlie  prefix  g-  (wliich  is  dropped  in  the   connected  form);  e.  g. 
oba,  i-oimng,  okg,  goimj;  obn,  hre(iliin(j\  ok 6,  fUjlilhui,  fiflld; 
own,  dyiiK),  deatli;  gkenkan.  readinij ;  gknsci,  tipedkinp,  lawimuie. 

2.  by  tlie  prefix  a-  (limited  to  certain  verbs  and  componnd  infinitives): 
adgw,  tilling  (the  ground);  asaw,  dancing;  aguare.  icasJiing: 
adidi,  ealing;  awo,  hirtli,  hnngingfoiili\  ago,  ngorn, pldi/iiig.  j)lfn/ : 
akasaktlsa,   akamekilme,   aperepere,  strife,  quarrel. 

3.  by  the  prefix  m-  (n-,   n-)   (limited  to  certain   verbs) : 

nna,  sleepy  nsisi,  niiada,  deceit;  nkyia,  fi reeling;  nhyisi,  meeting] 
h  h y  i  r  a,  blessing ;  n n  o  m  e,  (Mr sing ;  n  k am f  o, praise ;  n  s o  ])  a,  slander. 

4.  by  the  palatal  suffix   (of  rare  occurence): 

Onim  me  kgree  ne  me  b  a e,  Jie  knoms  wy  (going  and  roming. 
Da  hkwa,  da  nnipa  nhina  dae,  eternal  life  lies  ready  for  (dl  tnen. 

5.  by  the  nasal  prefix  and  palatal  suffix,  chielly  used  in  a  (•(luipound 

inflexional  form  of  the  verb,  see  §  107,  22. 

Wanya  hg  likge,  lie  has  often  gone  there. 

Many  a  no  fo  ntui,  1  have  often  adnnjnislied  Irini. 

Nea  wdnya  nhui  no,  onya  nkae,  he  irho  h,as  (repeatedly)  ^ecn 

a  thing,  knows  to  speak  of  it. 
Wgannya    iVhiii  a,    wgannya    nkae,    as    long    as  oiii'    Jias    not 

knonm  a  thing,  he  cannot  talk  of  it. 

10»»,   Comp)Ound  infinitives  (whicli,  concerning  their    meaning  and 
use,  are  also  equal  to  other  verbal  derivatives  m  English)  are  formed: 

1.  Of  two  verbs:   a.  with  or  witliout  the  prefix  g-; 

h.  with  the  prefix  a-  or  m-;   c.  with  the  nasal  prefix  and  palatal  sufiix. 
a.  sgfwe,  tempting,  temptation;   sufre,  gdadvven,  §39,7. 
I),  nkotgsere,  l)egging,  supplication;  ahyemfiri,  (going  in  and  oiil. 
c.  Many  a  no  nkakyeree,  1  have  often  told  him  (§  107,22). 

2.  Of  a  verb  and  its  complement  of  place,  with  the  nasal  prefix : 
m  f  i  a  s  e,  m  f  i  t  i  a  s  e,  n  h  y  e  a  s  e,  m  m  o  a  a  n  6,  n  n  a  n  a  n  i  &c.  see  §  30,  0  J>. 
n k y  e  r  e a s e,  explanaiiori;  n  k g s o,  going  on ;  m f o m so,  transgressio)! ; 
n  tot  oho,  comparison ;   nhumu,  insight;   nhyeananmu,  reslUntion. 

Complements   of  place  that  Iuvac  the  prefix  a-,   may  be  the.  iirst  part 
of  the  compound  : 
asefi,  asehye,  asekyere,  anoboa,  anidai'i,  a  nan  m  uhy  e,  §  39,  5//. 

3.  Of  a  verb  and  its   object  (or  sjn;'ifi,r  complement),  the  latter  form- 
ing the  first  part: 

Wagyde  aserikfi,  heh((s  ceased  preaching  (fr.  kA  asem,  to  prearh). 
Wo  a  g y  a  e  d  w  6  n  1 6,  Ihey  have  left  off  singing  (fr.  tod  w  o  m,  to  sing). 
Wanhu  aguadi,  //e  did  not  under.^itand  tradiiag  (di  gua,  to  trade). 
jpTiim  abebu,  he  knows  to  tell  jirorerbs  (fr.  bn  bo,  to  tell  proverb.s). 
Q.bi  iVkyere  agyinamoa  akrommo,  nobody  teaches  a  i-at  to  steal 
(fr.  bo   krgn,   /o   steal). 


§   lOG.  107.  THE    PARTS    OF    SPKKCII.  69 

Hem.  1.    When   tho.    object   has   any  attribute,    before  oi-  bcliiiul  it, 

it  must  be  written  as  a  separate  word  ;   e.  g. 

Onuyae  dwom   no  to,  he  does  not  lenre  o/f  siii'iiiifi  lli.ai  hi/nn/. 
Jiein.  2.    When   the    object   and  the    infinitive  are   not  plionetically 

united,  they  may  bo  written  as  separate  words;  e.  g. 

Onipa  cinnyae  mmobg  ye  a,  w  onuyae  nu  nimobo  h  Q,  <is  lotuj 
(IS  a  man  docs  not  cease  to  he  miserahle,  the//  don't  cease  to  com- 
miserate him.  Pror.  Cf.  mmoborohunu,  ahum  o bo,  §  3D,  5. 

4.  Of  a  verh  and  its  suhje^'l: 

aliopopo,   trenddhi'j;  ahddwiriw,  unna'emenl;  anigye,  /w/; 
a  b  ('» t  u,  despondency/ :   a  y  a  m  h  y  e  li  y  e,   compassion.  §  :>i>,  5  ((.  h. 
Item.  Combinations  of  the  cases   1 — 4,   see  §  39,  M. 

5.  Of  Q.  verh  and  the  noun  na,  mar\uu<^  difficnllp  of  doinf,'^  or  ye, 
niarking  easiness  of  doing. 

A  do  no  ye  gye-n:1,  tliat  thin;)  is  not  easily  done. 

Xs'jm  no  ase  ye  ohu-ua,  tliosc  tvords  are  not  easibf  understood. 

O'fa  abufuw  a,  wodi  no  pata-na,  ulien  he  (jets  ani/ri/,  he  is  not 

easilfi  pacified. 
Obi'iiya  n'ade  aye -ye,  lie  tvill  he  able  to  do  his  things  nxll. 
O  n  u y  ;1  n  s  e m  no  a s  c  a  k y  e r  c - y  e,  he  cannot  well  explain  these  words. 

COMBINATIOXS  OF  VEBBS. 

lOO.  Many  coijihinalions  of  a  j)rin:ipal  verh  with  one  or  two 
auxHiar//  re'rhs  arc  used  to  express  various  modifications  and  relations 
of  actions  (sebb^m  of  states).  We  consider  these  combinations  as  a 
kind  of  con/ponnd  iitflexiomd  form,  and  have  their  numbers  follow 
those  of  tbf  ton  simple  forms,  §  91.  In  most  of  them  either  the  au- 
xiliary, or  tlio  principal  verb,  or  both,  are  used  in  some  or  all  of  those 
siinplo  forms.     We  give   only  one  form  in  the  3rd  pers.  sing. 

JOT.  'J'he  first  class  of  verhal  combinations  contains  auxiliary 
verbs  which  ni?iy  be  applied  to  any,  at  least  aify  active,  verb.  We 
take  y  e  as  a  representant  of  the  principal  verb. 

11.  Oba  beye,  shortened:  obeye,  he  comes  to  do; 

gko  koye,  „  okoye,  ]/e  goes  to  do.   (Ingressive  form.) 

When  a  jirevious  going  or  coming,  required  for  the  performance 
of  an  action,  is  expressed  by  the  independent  verb  ba  or  k  o, 
this  verb  must  be  repeated  with  the  principal  verb  in  the  form  of 
the  prefix  be  or  ko;  but,  by  way  of  shortening,  the  prefix  alone 
will  do.  See  §  96. 

12.  Ope  aye  (—ope  so  oyo),  he  seeks,  desires,  wishes  to  do.  (De- 

sideratine  form)  -  Cf.  §  203  Bern.  256  Bern. 

('J'he  Future  obeye,  he  will  do,  may  also  express:  he  wishes  to 

do,  yet  in  a  less  degree.) 

13.  Oye  aye,  he  is  ahoiit  to  do,  is  in  preparation  for  doing     (Pre- 

parative form.) 


70  ETYMOLOGY-  §  K)8. 

11.  O'liyA  yij,  lit.  lie  (ids  docs,  i.e.  //(;  (/cLs  lo  Ihc  point  of  du/n;!,  lie 
does  alrcadt/.  This  form  is  vory  t'r('([U('utly  used  in  the  preterit 
negative:   onny;"i  n"yee(e),  he  hits  not  ijvi  done.  §  2.'30,  ;-). 

1.1.  Ofi(ase)  ye,  ofiti  ase  ye,  he  hv.'lins  docs,  (oboe  ye,  he  hcfl/iis 
doiiiii)  i.e.  he  hcjins  lo  do.  (hi'-cpUre  or  inehoalive  form.)  §2;5(), ;5. 

I(i.  <_)dj\  so  ye,  Jic  '■lies  on'  does   i    i.o.  he  citnliiines  lu  do,  does  slill 
oko  so  ye,  he  U/oes  on'  does       =  oyv  ^^^'ii-  (Forms  of  rontinnanc 
otoa,  so  yb,  he'joins upoii  does ]   mid  ronlinimlion.)  §2:50,4. 

•7.  0  y  e  k  y  e,   he  does  delays ; 

oye  mk  ekye,  he  does,   causes  it  lo  last  (hnn);\.  q.  he  does  i-oii- 
iinuini)  for  a  loni)  lime.  Cf.  §231,  o. 

IS.  Okye  ye  (inf.),  he  delai/s  doinii,  i.e.  lie  does  not  do  for  a  lonij  lime. 
Cf.  O'kye    neb  a,    he  delays  his  coinin,(j;  obae   akye,   he  came. 
it  has  hecome  loiui,  i.  e.  1 .  he  came  a  loni)  while  aijo ;  2.  he  did 
no  more  come  since  a  Ion;)  lime.  §2;]1,2.  4. 

IJ).  Oye   \vie.  ]t,e  does  finishes;       I  i.e.  lie  does  to  the  end,  com/jlelcly. 
0  \V  i  e  ye  (inf.)  he  finishes  doinq;  I  §  230,  5. 

20.  Osaii  ye,  he  returns  (repeals)  docs\  i.e.  Jie  does  aifain,  repealcdhi: 
osim'  yi:,  he  puts  in         .,  „        =  oye  bio.  (Iteralire  form). 
otim'  ye,  he  pi:ks  in        „  „      )  §  230,  2. 

21.  Ota    ye,  he  persecutes  does,  i.e.  Jie  does  often  --  oye  (l;i.  fFre- 

(/iienlatire  form.)  §  230,  2. 

22.  Wauya   nyee,  (inf.)  he  Jias  <fot  doinijs,    i.e.  he  has  often,  done, 

has  become  used  to  do.  Sec  §  2.30,  2. 

'l',i.  0  turn  1  ye,  Jie  is  ahle  does,  i.  e.  he  can  do,  is  able  lo  do.  §  20,')  llcm. 

24.  O'hu  ye,  onini  ye  (inf.)  he  Unows  doinif,  i.e.  he  can  do,  knows 
or  understands  to  do. 

2o.  Worn  A  oye,  iJu'i/  (fire  (or  cause)  he  does,  i.e.  llieij  cause  him  lo 
do.  make  or  let  him  do,  he  is  caused  or  made,  suffered  ov  per- 
mitted to  do.  (Causative  form.)  §01,  10.  255,3.  Hem. 

Rem.  In  the  Akyeni  Dialect  the  subject  of  the  principal  verb  is 
made  the  object  of  the  auxiliary;  e.g.  Wo  ma  okoe,  Ak.  wgmaano 
kore,  tficji  made  him  (jo.     Ma,  onko,  Ak.  ma  no  ko!  let  tiim  (jo! 

lOS.    A  second  class  of  verbal  combinalions  are   such,    in    which 
the  auxiliary  verb  de  or  corresponding  verbs  (fa,  gye,  yi,...)  are  used. 
20.  Ode ..  ye,  fie  fiolds  or  uses  ..  does,  i.  e  fie  docs  by,  trilfi,  lie  makes  of: 
the  auxiliary  verb   d  e  stands  for  the   Engl,  prepositions  />//,  u'itfi, 
in,  for  and  of,  introducing,  as  its  object,  the  means  or  instrument 
or  materi(d  for  the  action  of  the   principal   verb.    Cf.  §  237.   E.  g. 
Ode  a  dare  t\Va  dub  a',  u'itfi,  a  bill-fioofc  fie  cuts  a  branch. 
Ode  dua  sen  agua,  of  wood  he  carves  a  stool. 
O'mfa  n'asow   nkodow",  fie  sf tall  (JO  to  work  witfi  fbis  ftoe. 


§  108.  THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  71 

27.  Onam..  SO  ye,  he  walks  over  (somebody  or  .something)  docs,  i.e. 
he  docs  hij  or  Inj  means  of:  nam  with  the  ])o.stposition  so  is  also 
used  to  express  tlie  tray,  tiieans  or  mcdiulor  of  an  action;  in  tlic 
imperative  and  negative  forms,  nam   is  replaced  by  fa.    E.g. 

Onam  ne  ba  so  fry  yen,  he  calls  us  hy  Ids  son. 
Onam  nnjida  so  nyae,  he  fjot  (it)  hy  deceit. 

5[amfa  nkontompo    so   maun  ye    obi  biribi,    1  did  iiol  (alee 
any  lliin<i  from  any  man  hy  false  accusation,. 

28.  Ode.,  ma,  kye,  kyerc,  here..,  (he  takes ..)  (fires,  presents,  shows, 
hrinys.  The  auxiliary  sujiplies  the  want  of  distinction  between  two 
objective  cases  (dative  and  accusative),  introducing  the  direct  (imme- 
diate) object  and  leaving  the  indirect  (remote)  object  to  the  prin- 
cipal verb.  Cf.  §  206,  2.  E.  g. 

Ode  akutu  ma  abofra  no  =  O'ma,  abofra  no  akutu, 

he  (fires  the  child  an  orange. 
Ode  mfonini  kyere  neba=Okyere  ne  ba  mfonini, 

he  shows  his  child  a  ^ncture. 
Woam'fa  fwe  a  mm  ere  me,  yoil  hroiiffht  me  notltiiaj. 

2'J.  Ode  ..  ba,  ko,  fa,  tra,  si. ..(hRhi)J)ehrin(ts,talccs,pHts... somewhere; 
Ode.,  hyia  (obi),  foro,  si  an  (bepow),  san... 

The  auxiliary  introduces  an  object  which  is  caused  by  the  subject 
to  take  the  direction  or  occupy  the  place  indicated  by  the  prin- 
cipal verb  (and  its  object  or  complement  of  place).  Thus  the  in- 
transitive principal  verb  assumes  a  transitive  meaning  by  its  con- 
nection with  the  auxiliary.   Cf  §  206,  3.  4.  E.  g. 

ObjuY  ofie,  he  came  home.  Agua  bi  si  ho,  a  stool  stands  there. 

Ode  no  baa  ofie,  he  hrought  him  home. 

Ode  agua  si  ho,  he  places  a  stool  there. 

Wode  n  tram  a  gii  adakam,  they  put  cowries  into  a  ItOX. 

Ode  ne  nnipa  foro  bepgw,  he  ascends  a  mountain  with  his  men. 

Fa  no  ko  fie,  take  him  (go)  home.   Fa  ko!  away  with  it! 

lO$>.  A  third  class  of  verbal  comhinntions  are  such  in  wliich  the 
auxiliary  adds  the  expression  of  direction  to  the  principal  verb.  (Such 
directive  verbs  supply  the  place  of  the  directive  prepositions  in  Engl.) 
We  may  distinguish  3  cases: 

3ft.  Two    or  three  locative  and  at  the    same    time    directive  verbs    arc 
combined.  Cf.  §  223,  2.  4.  E.  g. 
fi  (z=from)..  ba,  k  o,  f\ve,  si,  duru... 
fa  {=  through) . .  ba,  ko. 
Ofi  dua  so  fwee  fam'  he  coming  from  on  the  tree  fell  to  the 

ground,  i.  e.  he  fell  down  from  the  tree. 
Ofii  Galilea  faa   Samaria   kgo  (or  baa)  Yudea,  he  proceeded 
from  Galilee  took   (his  way)    through   Samaria    went  (or  came) 
to  Jiidea,  i.  e.  he  went  from  G.  to  J.  hy  way  of  S. 
Hem.  Not  directive,  but  merely  locative,  is  the  auxiliary  verb  wo; 
see  8  117. 


ETYMULtXiV.  t?  110. 


'M.    Dirc'iirc  verbs,   eitlior   locative  or   ohjcciwc,    arc   added   to    iiitraiisi 
tive  verbs.  Cf.  §  2-i;}.  224.  E.  g. 
tu  (fi)..   ba,   k(),  bctrA,   kotrn..,   lo  rt'iiwve  (from..)  Lu . . 
guaii  (t'i)..  ba,   ko  (loc),  lo  flee  (from..)  lo  some  plaee; 

„  „         do,  toa  (obj.),   „      „  „  „        „      person  \ 

gnarc  (t'i)..   t  \v  a  (obj.),   ba,   ko  (loc),  to  s/r/n>  (from  .Jorvr..  lo.. 
buruw   tra  (obj.)  si  (loc),  lo  leap  (honiid)  over..   uj)Oii.. 
t\va..  lio  si,  liyia,  to  cul  around ..  slaiul  or  meel,  i  q.  lo  surround, 
koto  sere..,  lo  supjjlicate  he'.)  (somebody).  \eni-oni}>ass. 

su  fro.,  to  weep  call,  i.e.  lo  implore. 

kasa  kyere. .  lo  speak  address,  i.e.  lo  admon/^li,    'nisirarl. 
Otu  t'i'i  Asaiite  betraa  Akyem,  lie  removed  from  Ax.  lo  Ahem. 
Ofii  Dodi   guare  t  \V  a  a   Firaw'   baa  Awurahai, 

he  sicain  from  Dodi.  over  the    Vol'a  lo  Aivaraliai. 
S2.  Directive  vi'-rh a  are  added  to  transitive  verbs.  Cf.  §  2(Ui. ;).  22;>,  4.  E.g. 
ye.,  nia,  fa,  to  do  or  maJce  for.. 
kyerew..   be  re,  mauii,  koma,   lo   irrile  lo.. 
liu  ma,  te  ma,  su  mil,  lo  sympatlu::e,  have  comjiassion   <riili.. 
ye.,   t  i  a,   bye,  g  u . .  s  o,  to  do  against . . 

ka  (as em)  kyere,  to  speak  to-.,  ka..  si  so,  lo  speak.,   mak-'  up: 
ka  (nnuaii)  ko  (danmu),  to  drive  (sheep)  into  (th.e  sluhlcj ; 
ka..  bora',   bp  ho,  team',  ku  ho,   bo  anim,  to  join  to'felhcr: 
bo.,  gu,  fwete,  pete,  pansam;  pam..  gu,    to  scatter,  disperse: 
fwie..  gu,  to  pour  out;  tow.,  gu,  kyene,  to  cast  a/cai/ ; 
fro.  .ba,  hyia..ba,  to  call,  hid  (to  come),  to  invite. 

31  e pam  tros  me  ma  Kofi,  7  sew  troi'^scrs  for  K. 

]\leu\vene  kete  mafa,  ]  tveave  a  mat  for  myself. 

Wa  kyerew  iihoma  abere  me,  na  me  iiso  me  kyerew"  bi 
mekomAji  uo,  he  has  written  a  teller  to  me,  and  1  also  wrolr 
one  to  him. 

11©.  A  fourth  class  of  verbal  comhinaiions  arc  such  in  w]iich 
I5I5.  two  transitive  verbs  are  combined  so  as  to  express  ouc  notion 
Tlie  former  of  the  two,  as  the  principal  verb,  is  fitllowed  Iiy  the 
object;  the  second  verb  makes  up  tlie  sense  of  the  former  and  rcu'ers 
to  the  same  object  without  repeating  it,  or  may  have  its  own  ob- 
ject in  the  form  of  a  sentence  introduced  by  the  conjunction  s  e. 
gye   (asem)    di;    gye..tie,    to  helieve.    [Cf.  gye   (aduaii)   di,    lo 

receive  food  (and)  eat;  gye  nom!  lake  (and)  drink.'] 
k  a  . .  f  \v  e,  s  o  . .  f  w  e,  h  u  a  m  . .  t  i  e,  to  taste,  Ir//. 
]\Iigyeno  midi,   I  helieve  (in)  him.    Wagye  atie,  Ji.e  has  ohct/cd. 
Maka  aduah'  no  mafwe,  /  luive  tasted  that  food. 
M  e  s  0  (m  e  h  o)  m  a  f  w  e  s e  ni e  t u  rn i  no  a n  a  ? 

I  will  try  ichetlier  I  shall  he  ahle  to  overcome  him. 
O'huam   tiV  no  atie  se  eye  ana? 

He  smells  at  tlie  lohacco  to  see  whether  it  is  (jood  or  not. 
Item.   Between   this   and  the  following  class,    we  might   mention   \hv 
mmbination  of  a  jjrincipal  verb   with   auxiliaries  of  (comparison  and) 
gradation:  fse,)  sen,  kyeh.      See  §  117,  3 (Z^.)';.  269.  271. 


§   111 -Hi.  THE    TARTS    OF    SPEECH.  7.3 

811,     A  /iflh,  class  of  rcrhal  rom/nnalions  arc.  sncli  in   wliidi 
114.  ;i  subordinate  verb  (taking-  the  load)   is   used  to  express  an   ather- 
bial  circumstance   ol'  the  principal   action;   cF.  §  'ioS,  3.  234.  E.  g-. 
Opatiiw  ye,  he  does  (it)  stiddeid//,  anexpacled/// ; 
Oliintaw  ye,  onam   ase  ye,  he  does  (il)  se'U'cUi/.  rlandeslincly; 
On  am  so  ye,  he  does  (it)  forlluviih.  slvniijliifoyivard. 
On  a  in  n  nam  so  ye,  lie  does  (il)  undanntedly. 

W2.  In  in(,st  of  these  verbal  combinations  (^  106-1 1 1  j,  eitlier  the 
auxiliary,  or  the  principal  verb,  or  both  of  them,  may  be  used  in  some 
or  all  of  those  simple  forms  mentioned  in  §  'Jl.l-lU.  Two  or  more 
single  combinations  may  be  united  in  on(;  com})lex  combination.  In 
all  these  cases  of  rijinie:ted  forws,  the,  tones  often  differ  from  those 
of  the  simple  forms,  but  it  would  lead  us  too  far,  to  specify  the  dif- 
ferent Combinations   and  tones   in   this   })lace. 

[Foreign  students  of  the  laiiginiiv  will  do  well  in  having  sentences  and  periods 
read  t(i  tiacni  by  natives,  and  riiari<ing  tlie  tones  for  their  own  use,  until  they  have 
become  accustomed  to  the  waj's  in  which  the  tones  are  adapted  to  the  dift'ertiit 
combinations.] 

An  observation  that  will  go  pretty  far  in  this  respect,   is  tliis  :   Two 
verbs  frequently  join  in  high  tones;   e.g.  instead  of  nicko  na  maba, 
we  say:  meko  maba,  J  (jo  (tvith  (he  iiitenlion)  to  coine  (aiiain). 
Instead   of;  migye  mfdi,   we  say:  migyc  niidi,   /  helie')e  (it). 

ISJ$,  Many  verbal  notions  that  are  exjjressed  by  simple  verbs  in 
the  English  and  other  European  or  Asiatic  languages,  are  expressed 
by  syntactical  combinations  of  verbs  with  spccifie  Stdj'ecls  or  ohjeol--i 
and  other  (adverbial)  '■otvplemenls.  Wc  call  them  verhid /jJirases,  and 
do  not  treat  them  here  as  'compound  verbs',  but  refer  them  to  the 
syntax  (§  21()-22())   and  the  dictionary. 

G.  ADVEKBS  including  POSTPOSITIONS. 

I  I'l.  An  adverb  shows  place,  or  lime,  or  mtnner  and  deffrce,  or 
i-anse  and  sitnilar  circumstances  of  an  action  or  state. 

Itetv.  Together  with  the  adverbs  tliat  are  mere  adjnncls  to  prali- 
i-ates,   we  speak  here  also  of  the  cOViplviiieids  of  place. 

Adverbs  are  usually  added  to  verbs  (whence  their  name).  When  the 
verb  has  an  object  or  oilier  complement,  the  adverb  stands  after  it. 
(Some  adverbs  are  also  [)ui   before  the  subject,  e.  g.  gyama,  §  i:)3.) 

O'ba  ha  da,  lie  always  comes  here.   Srchko  ho  da,  I  nener  yo  tJierv. 

O'ye  n'adwi'ima  yiye,  lie  docs  his  trorlc  well. 

Ode  ali(uic  nbo  ne  nsa  fewso   kwa,  he  ivears  heads  nuiwl  his 
irrist  only  for  finery. 
Sometimes  adverbs  are  added  to  adjectives  of  quality,   showing  degree. 

Eye  dua  kese  pa,  it  is  a  rcry  laryc  tree. 

Obo  no  ye  duru  se,  that  stone  is  very  heavy. 


74  ETYMOLOGY.  §115-117. 

I  I  o.  A  word  that  clciiotes  j)lace,  time,  manner,  cause  &c.  not  by 
itself  alone,  hat  with  reference  to,  and  in  connection  with,  other  tilings 
or  notions,  expressed  by  nouns  or  pronouns,  is,  in  the  English  and 
many  other  languages,  called  a  jirepusil/oii  or  podposiliou,  and  may 
show,  not  only  the  relation  of  an  arlion.  or  slate  to  a  tJiiini,  but  also 
(by  omission  of  a  verbal  notion)  the  relation  of  a  tJuiiij  to  a  tliiiaj; 
e.  g.  a  doth  lies  on  the  table;  the  rlolli  on  the  table  (=^the  cloth  wliich 
lies  on  the  table)  is  white.  In  'J'shi  this  class  of  words  does  not  exist, 
;uid  we  must  show  here  the  way  in  which  they  are  supplied  partly 
by  verbs,  partly  by  nouns  which  arc  also  used  as  adverbs,  and  partly 
Ity  both   of  them. 

IIO.     ^Ve   shall,   therefore,  s])eak   under  the  head   of  'Adverbs': 
I.   Of  prepositions  and  j)Ostposilionx  in  general  ; 
II.  of  noiii>s    of  plaee  and  relation,    serving  as  adverbs  and  )>ost- 
positions ; 

III.  of  other  nonns.  jirononns  and  adrerbs  of  plu'X:, 

IV.  of  nouns  and  adverbs  of  time; 

V.  of  nouns  and  adverbs  of  manner  and  decree ; 
W.  of  nonns  and  adrerbs  of  cause; 
VII.  of  English  adverbs  expressed  otherwise  in   'I'shi. 

I.  Prepositions  and  Postpositions. 

J  I  7«     I'he  pre})ositions  of  European  and  other  languages  are  ex- 
pressed in  Tshi 
a.  by   a  class   of  auviliar/j  verbs,    wliijh    we    may    call   prepositional 

verbs,  combined   with    the    principal    verb    of    the    sentence,    as    has 

been  shown  in  §  108.  100. 
^.  by  postpositions,  which   are  in   fact  nouns   (of  place   and  relation). 

A.  The  prepositional  verbs  arc  used  for  the  following  relations: 
1.  Relations  of  place. 

a.  Rest  in  a  place  (in  answer  to  the  question  where?)  is  indicated  by 
wo  (§  102,  3).  This  verb  introduces  a  /ilace  ivliere  the  subject  or 
object  is,  or  an  action  (joes  on;  the  place  itself  is  indicated  by  nouns 
of  place,  part  of  which,  when  referring  to  certain  objects,  are  also 
called  j)Ostpositions  (§118-127).  Together  with  such  postjjositious, 
wo  may  stand  for  the  prepositions  in,  on,  at,  bij,  ivitlr,  ujion,  over, 
above,  under,  below,  amongst,  between,  before,  behind,  about,  near. 

b.  Direction  from  a  place  {whence?)  is  expressed  by  fi,  firi,  to  come 
or  proceed  from,  answering  to  the  preposition  from  and  (especially 
together  with  the  postposition  m  u)  out  of.  §109,30.31. 


§117.  THE    PARTS   OF    SPEECH.  75 

C.  Dii'cdion  lo  or  loiriirds  a  pUice  {irlu'lher':')  is  indicated  b}-  the  verbs 
ko,  to  (ju,  b  a,  lo  vOiliCi  and  the  same  as  iiuircs.sire  prefiJCi'S  (k  o-, 
ko-,  be-,  be-,  §  i^6.)  before  other  verbs,  as:  si,  du,  ka,  ])eiTi,  tra  &c., 
also  by  gu,  kyene,  [)ete,  kyere,  &c.  §  109,31.32.  Together 
with  nouns  of  place  or  postpositions^  those  verbs  express  the  pre- 
position lo,  unto,  towards,  into,  up,  down;  upon,  over,  above,  under, 
below,  awoniisl,  between,  before,  beJtind,  ahoul,  near. 

d.  Other  movements  in  space  {wli.ere?)  are  expressed  by  the  verbs 
nam,  fa,  for  motions  in,  throu(/h  a  place,  atonf),  opposite  to  an  object; 
t  \v  a  for  motion  across  (a  river,  way  &c.);  with  mu:  athwart; 
t\Va  (ho)  liyia  or  si,  for  motions  around,  round  about  an  object; 
tra,  for  motions  over  and  be//ond  an  object.  —  Cf.  §  109,  30.  31.  223. 

2.  lielations  of  time. 

a.  wo,  b.  fi,  r.  besi,  kosi,  bedu,  kodn,  are  also  employed  to  indi- 
cate relations  of  time,  answering  to  tlic  questions  a.  whcn'^  b.  since 
when  ?  c.  till  or  until  when  '^  —  Cf.  §  227,  2.  229. 

3.  lielations  of  manner,  de<jree,  instrumentalilij,  also  accomjianimcnt 
and  exclusion. 

a.  \v 0  may  introduce  an  expression  showing  manner  by  the  postposi- 
tions so,  iiwo,  ^  aijreeimj  with.,  accordin<i  to. 

b.  se,  to  be  like,  indicates  equality  or  similaritu  by  comparison ;  as,  like. 

c.  boro,  kyen,  sen,  to  surpass,  ejccell,  expresses  the  prep,  above  = 
more  than.  Cf.  §209.271. 

(/.  de,  fa,  introduce  the  material,  instrument,  means,  accompani/infi 
object,  when  in  Engl,  the  prepp.  of,  bt/,  with,  arc  used;  §  lOS,  26.  29. 

6'.  nam.. so,  fa.. so,  arc  also  used  for  by,  by  mciins  of.  showing  the 
way  or  mediation  of  action;  §  lOS,  27. 

/'.  fra,  to  inije,  serves  for  the  prep,   amoia/;  §  237  c. 

c/.  gye,  to  accept,  answers  also  to  the  Engl.  prej).  ejxej)t.  save,  but; 
cf.  Rem.  1.2.  §  1 33.  235  b. 

h.  kwati,  kwae,  gyaw,  s  i  a  n  e,  to  omit,  leave  aside,  pass  by,  ans- 
wer to  the  prep,   ivitltout;  §  237  J). 

4.  lielations  of  cause,  concern,  aim,  intention,  purpose. 

a.  w q  may  introduce  exj)ressions  showing  cause  and  reference  to,  by 
the  postpositions  nti,  so,  lio,  =  the  prepositions  for  IJ/C  sake  of 
tou/hinfi,  concerniny,  about;  §  200,3.  201,  2. 

b  ma,  to  yivc,  answers  to  the  prepp.  for,  in  behalf  of ,  on  account  of ; 
fa,  to  take,  answers  to  for,  when  a  person  does  or  makes  some- 
thing /b/'  himself;  koma,  here,  to  briny,  mixwix,  to  send  by  oppor- 
tunity, answer  to  the  prepositions  for,  to,  in  connection  with  verb.s 
implying  an  intended  communication.  Cf.  §  2oG,  3.  243?/. 


76  KTYMOLOGY  §117. 

'•.  iiiji,  to  (fi>'t',  p:y<\  Id  rci-eivi\  scsa,  to  exaJuinfic,  aiiswcr  to  I'or.  iu- 

slead  of.  used  in  Intninij  or  selh'ii'i  or  cjc:han;)e^  i;2;!7/>. 

Ki    or    liye    a  u  a  ii  m  a,    to  s'.ej)  ov  put  in  the  foot-inarh,    answer  to 

instead  of,  in,  the  piaee  of:  §  237  />. 
^/  t  i  a,  to  kick,  live,  fo  //x  nj>ou,  j^u  (so),  /a  ca.s/  itj)on.   (express:  <i- 

fliiinat  (a  person):  §  24o  /v. 
c.  sie,  to   reposit,  preserve,    cxjircsscs:    for.    widinst    (an   event);  juIv. 

preriousli/;  §  243  6. 

Ztt'yy/.  /.  Most  of  these  preijositional  verbs  are  conjui^ated,  i.  e.  they 
assume  [)ronominal  and  negative  prefixes,  and  tlie  prefixes  and  suFtixes 
of  the  tenses  and  moods;  tliey  arc,  tlierefore,  to  be  treated  as  verbs, 
and  are  mentioned  here  onh"-  for  tlie  sake  of  comparison  with  the 
Hnii'lisli  prepositions.  Yet  the  verbs  wo,  se,  and  gye  (ejccept),  have 
so  far  .stripped  off  thi'ir  verbal  character  and  have  become  mere  par- 
ticles, as  tliey  do  not  assume  any  prefixes,  not  even  the  pronominal 
prefix  me,  nor  the  negative  prefix,  except  when  they  are  nsed.  not 
as  prepositional  or  auxiliary  verbs  or  particles,  but  as  principal  verbs. 
('1  he  negative  of  wo  is  then  replaced  by  that  of  di.)  This  use  of 
wg  and  so  without  any  inflexion  may,  in  literal  translation,  be  indi- 
cated  by  the  Engl,  participle;  e.  g. 

Wan  ye  fwe  wo  Osu,  ]te  has  not  done  an'/thini;  {Ijein;))  at  Osn. 

-Meye  adwuma  se  on 6.  I  do  icork  eqndlinj  him,  i.e.  like  hint. 

Obi  n'ni  fie,  gye  menii.  nohodij  is  at  home,  except  my  mother. 

Mintie  obi.  gye  m'agya,  I  listen  to  none  hut  (ex: ept)  nijj  father. 

Item.  2.  The  partich's  se  and  gye,  or  both  united,  may  also  be 
considered  as  conjunctions,  and  the  word  governed  by  them  as  the 
su'.)ject  or  object  of  an   elliptical   sentence;    e.g. 

L|i^y<;  ad  w  urn  a  se  me,  he  does  not  (do)  fork  like  me,  =  se  me- 
ye, as  J  do. 

Ounom  fwe  se  nsu  h  k.  6  [na  ouomj,  he  drinks  no'Jiimi  hut  (Onlij) 
n'ater  \jie  drinks]. 

Obi  amma,  se  gye  uuipa  banii  pe  [supply;   na   ebae],    nohod// 
came  except  onhj  two  men  [ca,me\. 

Manhfi  obi,  se  gye  nnipa  btuiu  no  [supply:  na  miliiifi  wonj, 
/  saw  nobody,  except  [that  I  saw']  those  two  persons. 
In   other  cases  we  reckon  gye  simply  among  the  adverbs;  e.  g. 

(Tye  Onyame  (liko)  na  onim,  only  (jOcI  knows  (it). 
('J'his  is  in  fact  only  another  kind  of  ellipsis,  a  previous  thought  "Obi 
nnim.   nobody  knows''   being  left  out.) 

B.  The  postpositions  are  the  nouns  of  place  and  relation  specified 
and  explained  in  §  118-122.     They  express  the  English  prepositions 

a.  by  themselves,  when  the  reference  of  a  thing  or  action  to  the  place  (or 
time  &c  )  of  another  thirifi  is  implied  in  the  verb  or  in  the  attributive 
Ijosition  of  the  postposition,  or  when  it  is  plain  from  other  reasons; 

b.  toyether  with  an  auxiliary  or  prepositional  verb,  of  those  mentioned 
under  A,  when  that  reference  is   not  included  in  the  principal  verb. 


§118.  THE   PARTS   OF    SPEECH.  77 

((..  Osokan   bi  dh  poii  no  so,  (i  knife  if;  /i/in;/  on  Ihal  tabic. 

Fa  upon  no  so  sektin  no,  lake  iJie  knife  [Ihal  lies]  on  Ih  U  tahh;! 

Olienc  llerocle  berc  so  no   wo\V(')o   Yrsu,  Jr;ui:i  was  horn  in 

Ihe  lin/c  of  kiufi  Herod. 

h.  M  i li  li  Ci  si'kni'i   no  wo  poi'i   no  so,  1  .svi/r  Ihe  knife  on  Ihc  lahle. 

Otow'  seknn  no  kyonec  <abr;uin;V  so,  //.'  flun/j  lit. "  knife  npon 

Ihe  g  alien/ ;  (the  verb  tow  does  not  imply  a  direction  lo  a  place ; 

this  direction,   tlierefore,    is  indicated   by  the   anxiliarv   kyene.. 

(' '.  'J'lie  ronjiinclion  ne,  originally  equal  to  the  rerh  (le(§l,'j9).  is 
often  used  for  the  Engl,  preposition  n'ilh,  deuoting  aeron/paninwn', 
sometimes  also  for:  on   aeronnl   of. 

^I  e  ne  no  bae,  1  came  n:ilh  liim.    Ye-ne  woii  koe,  ire  n'enl  /riih  Ihrni. 
(Jmaaycn    mo  ne  ko,  he  (jave  us   "■hail!''    and  flgliUni,  i.e.  ///-  rr- 

firessed  Jiis  rongrainlalion  on  accounl  of  our  swressfnl  fn/hUn j. 

II.  NOUNS  OF  PLACE  ANT)  IIELATION 

serving  as  Adrerhs  and  Voslposilions. 

I  I  8«  '1  hf  chief  nonns  of  jilace  and  relaJion  (which  are  alsn  fie- 
([ucntly  used  in  composition,  like  most  (d'  the  originu!  prepositiou.s  iu 
English)  are  the  following  eight : 

eso  (osoro),   ase,   emu,   eho,   ano,   a  n  i,   aniin.   aivvi     akyirij. 
Their  manifold   meanings  and  uses,   also   as  names  <d'  tilings    may   be 
arranged  thus:  —    I'bey   denote: 

1.  A  place  which  is  at  the  same  time  a  pari  af  a  Uiing:  —  then 
they   are,  simply  to  be  considered   as   nann's  of  lliings. 

Poma  no  ase  abu,  llie  under  pari  or  /)iee  of  ll/c  ■'<'ik  is  hmkrn. 

2.  A  jiljtre  without  relation  to  a  ]iarticnlar  tiling,  though  \\  itli  ic- 
ference  to  the  general  space  in  which  we  live,  to  the  nni\(Mse  or  to 
the  upright  human  body  {-  indejhlile  relalion).  'Ihen  thev  are  iHuins 
of  place,   which   are  frequently  used   as  ad^■erbs. 

O'te  ase,  he  lives,  exists  (on  ilie  gronnd  or  earth). 
Tra  ase!  sit  down!  Wafw  e  ase,  he  lias  fallen  doa-n,  lo  the  fp'onnd. 
Me  da  (no)  ase,   1  lie  donii  (to  or  for  him,  in  his  hehidf), 
i.  e.  /  thank  (him). 

?>.  A  place  n:ilh  referen-e  lo  a  thing,  a  place  contiguous  to  a  cer- 
tain thing  (or  person)  that  is  (usually)  mentioned  before  it  in  the 
positi(ni  of  an  attribute  in  the  possessive  case.  Sometimes  lime  or 
other  relation  is  expressed  by  the  same  word;  see  §  129,  1-5.  121,2. 
In  this  case  we  call  such  a  noun  of  place  a  postposition  or  a  nonn 
of  relation,  because  it  shows  the  relation  of  another  thing,  or  of  its 
action   or  states,   to  the  thing  to   which  the   post]tosition   is  added. 

()guan  hi  da  dua  no  ase,  <i  sheeji  lies  nnder  that  tree..  (Tlic  |)ost- 
position   ase  shows  the  relation  oi'  tJie  sheep,  or  its  lying,  to  tiad  tree.) 


78  ETYMOLOGY.  §  119. 

When  the  noun,  to  wliicli  tlie  i)()st])osition  refi'rs,  is  mcntionofl  before, 
it   is  replaced  hy   a  pronoun;   e.  i;-. 

Ak('ikotan   no    butuw    n  e   mm  a    so;     woii   iiliin.i     liye    n'aso, 
iJ/al  hen  sils  over  her  rhirkcHs;  the//  all  are  under  her. 
But  wlien  it  is   an   inanimate  tliiii<;-,    the   ])r(inoun    is   omitted   and   tlie 
notin  of  rehition    stands   absohite,   tIiou<;li   flie   reference  to  that  certain 
tiling  is   understood;   e.  j?;. 

Ohuu  dna  b  i,   na  okodaa  ase,    lie    siiir  sonw  free  and  n'e.nl  (o 

lie  under  (if). 

4.  Those  nouns  may  also,  by  a  kind  of  (dlipsis,  denote,  in  a  collec- 
tive manner,  the  thimjs  contained  in.  a  j)lace,  as  described  under  .'». 
In  this  case  they   may  be  considered  as  rollerlire  manes  of  Ihin  /s. 

Wo  t  a  s  e  t  a  s  e  d  u  a  no  as  e  (scil.  n  n  e  e  m  a), 
Ihej/  ijudier  (Ihe  (Jrintis)  nnder  Ihd  tree. 

A  k  I'l  U  o  no   ase  afee,   Ihal  Jwji's  posieritii  lias  iiirre((srd. 

.^).  From  the  meanings  given  under  1-1,  othei-s  may  be  deri\<'d,  which 
make   such   nouns  equal  to   other  nouns  of  things,   concrete  or  abstract. 
Kyereme  asem  no  ase,  slio/r  ine  Ihe  nwaniii'i  (sense)  of  thai  irord. 
M' akw/intu  ase  n  i,  this  is  the  reason  for  na/  journey. 
Metra  mu  makodu  ase,  1  shall  endure  unto  the  end. 

Iff).    ^Vc  now  give  the   meanings  ol'  tlie   above   mentioiu'l  S  nouns 
of    ])lace.    and   relation   (§118),    1.   as   parts    of   things,    2.   as    parts    ol' 
sjiace,  ."5.   as  post])ositions,   translating  these   by  the   Engl,  jircjiositions 
and   adding  the  Engl,   adverbs, 
eso,  osoro:  1.  the  upper  part;  2.  the  upper  parts,  the  spare  ahore\ 

(osoro,  heaven;)   .').  on,  up,  over,  upon,  ahore,  npirard,  on  hi<ih; 

iised  of  time:  in,  at,  diirin;/;  of  (jtber  ridations:   on,  at,  ronreriiiiKi. 

in,  from,  irith. 
ase:   7.  the  nether  or  lower  part  or  end  (or  heiiinninfi):  ,2.  the  nether 

or  lower  parts,   the  way  down;   .9.  down,    under,   heloir,    heneath, 

downward;  of  time:  in,  at,  under,  durinij. 
emu,    the  interior:  1.  the  inner  or  middle  part,  inside  (also  tlie  middle 

part   of  the  hnman  body,    and    of  an   expanded  surface  &c.  any 

poiyil  ivithin  the  circumference;  2.  ihe  inner  parts,  the  space  within 

or  inside;  3.  in,,  at,  into,  tlirouyh,  within,  inward,  inaide;  oi'  t'uno: 

in,  at,  dnriny;  of  a  plurality  of  things:    amony,  amonyst,  'under; 

in  connection  with  certain  verbs  (as  fi,  to  proceed  from):  out,  from. 
ehd,   the  exterior:    1.  the   outer  or  outward  part,    outside,    (also   the 

human   frame,   the  whole  body,   the  irhole  person,   cf.  §  :).3  Hem. 

§  57.  217,  1.  218,  Irt.    2.  the  0}itward  parts,   the  spare  trithout   or 

outside,    nearness,  proximity ;  S.  at,   hy,   near,   sidewards,    atiout. 

around;   of  other  relations:  at,  about,  touihiny,  com-erniny. 
a  no:   /.  the  edye,  brink,  brim,  lip,  utmost  end,  maryin;  also  the  mouth, 

esp.   the  lijis   as   the   borders   of  its   ojiening,   and    Ijic  Idll  of  a   bird, 


§  120.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  79 

also  a  heap  or  nuwher  of  things  (being  defined  l)y  a  margin  or  end); 

2.  ihe  spare  alomj  or  at  the  iilniosl  end;  ,'/.  oh,  (tl,  aloiuj;  of  other 

relations:  according  io. 
ani:  1.  the  face  (also  the  human  fare,  espec.  the  eye)^  the  surf  are; 

2.  the  space  ahove  a  surface;  5.  on,  upon.,  over,  above. 
an  im':  :Z.  the  face  (also  the  human,  fare),  the  front,  frontsidr,  forepart; 

2.  the  spare  in  sight,  in  front  of,  before; 

S.  before,  fora^ards,  on,  onn'ard(s). 
akyi,   akyiri  (Ak.  akyire) :  1.  the  bark  (akyi,  the  bark  of  the  hanaai 

bodg),  the  back  part,  hind  part,  also  the  outside  of  hollow  vessels; 

2.  the  space  behind  or  oi//.S'«/e  (of  hollow  vessels  and  enclosed  s])aces") ; 

akyiri,  akyiri kyiri,  renwte  distance; 

S.  behind,   outside,    without;  op6h    akyi,    before  i.  e.  outside  the 

door;  barkwards\  far  off,  far  away;  of  time:    after,  after uuirds, 

Cf.  §  33  Rem. 
Hem.  'V\\G  tone  of  so,  mu,  and  of  the  stem  of  a  no,  akyi,   is  loir, 
as  often  as  these  four  words  are  joined  to  a  pronoun  in  tlu^  jiossessive 
case  ending  with  high  tone;  in  other  cases  the  tone  is  A  A///,   and  that 
of  the  jjrefix  low. 

'Y\\o  tone  of  ho  and  of  the  stem  of  ase,  ani,  is  high,  wliether  that 
of  the  preceding  syllable  be  high  or  low;  when  high,  tlie  prefix  a-  is 
high  likewise.  When  ase  is  not  a  post])osition,  it  lias  sometimes  tow 
tone,  e.g.  in   te  ase,  to  live,  da  ase,  to  thank. 

120«  1.  The  words  eso,  emu,  eho,  retain  their  prefir  almost 
only  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  separated  from  a  preceding  sen- 
tence or  clause  of  a  sentence,  and  the  prefix  may  be  taken  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  the  pronoun  which  is  left  out  when  referring  to  a  thing, 
not  a  person. 

2.  The  word  mu  very  easily  drops  its  u,  and  is  tlicn  written  togetlier 
with  the  preceding  word,  usually  with  an  a))osti-opb(>;  but  tlic  tone  of 
this  m'  is  always  in  contrast  to  tliat  of  tlie  syUable  which  it  lias 
joined,  e.g.  epom',  nsam\    Cf.  §  1 1 9  Jif'W?. 

3.  Osoro  is  used  when  it  does  not  refer  to  a  special  tiling,  l)ut  to 
space  in  general. 

4.  Akyiri  is  used  for  akyi,  when  it  stands  without  a  jtossessive 
case  before  it,  e.  g.  when  a  pronoun,   referring  to  a  thing,  is  omitted. 

(Jkwah  a  onam  so  no,   eso  ye  tr»)tro,  the  W(ty  on  whiih  he  walks, 

it  (its  upper  part)  is  smooth;  or: 
emu  aye  p  a  tor  o  pat  or  o,  //  Jias  become  .slippery. 
O'fwe  gsoro,  he  looks  up,  upwards. 

Otwam'  (^otwa  mu),   he  cuts   {or  pursues  a  line  lying  in)    the 
middle  (part  of  the  space  in  which  we  live)  i.  e.  ///'  jiasscs  b/f. 
(The  compound  verbs  teem',  to  cry  out,  bom'  =  bo  m  n,  to  cry,  roar, 
thunder,    must  in   a  similar  way  be  explained  as  the  straightforward 
peneti-ating  of  the  space   by  the  voice  or  otluM-  sounds.) 


80  ETYMOLOGY.  §122. 

Osiim'   koe,  he  departed  =  Osii   kwan   m  u  (or:   kw/ui   sn )   k  (')  (^, 
he  Mi'pped  in  (or  on)  the  ivay,  he  set  out,  started. 

(_)  (1  a  11   y  i   a  11  i  ni'  ye  f'c' ;   a  k  y  i  r  i   d  i' ,  (■  u  t  (>   s  a , 

/A,"  fro)d-Hid.e  of  this  house  is  fine:  the  Jiark-side  is  not  sn. 

()i;'yiua,  akyirikyiri,  Ji"  stands  in  a  remote  distan^'e,  far  aa-ay. 

it>l.  1.  One  noun  of  rclafiou  or  postposition,  \iz.  nti,  is  cxc-lii- 
sivcly  used  to  iudicati',  rausc.  It  seems  to  bo  related  to  (!ti,  Ak 
I'tiri,  head,  and  originally  to  signify  (lie  upper  rral  as  tlio  fdarc  or 
sD/iri/e  from   whicli   an   action   proceeds. 

It  lias  nouns  or  pronouns  (or  even  s'nite,uces,  §2.')'>,  {j  i)  as  deliuing 
attrihutes  in  the  possessive  case  Iief'ore  it  (§240.  'l\'.'>,a}:  \i  imt,  \\c 
w rite  e  11 1  i  =  e  n  o  nti.      CF.  §  1  20.  1.14 ().  202,  //. 

Xitj'in    nti    woknm"  no,   Ofd  of  rnr//  Ij/c  /  ki/ta/f  J/in/, 

XsaiV   nti   uyari",   tlinnidi   '-oid.arjion  he   is  si  1; 

S  i  k  a    nti   n  a   o d  e  li  y  ('"  d  a  I'l'   a  k  o  i'l, 

on  (trroiin!  of  monei/  a  freemin  fnromes  a  st.irr. 

E  ik'i  nti,  eyi  nti,   therefore,  for  this  rrasnn:  edenntiV   n-hi/Y 

'i'lns  postposition,  with  its  possessixc  cast'  hcrore  it,  usuallv  precedes 
the  sul)ject  and  \erl)  of  the  sentence,  and  is  often  inllowed  hy  the 
coijjuncti(ni  n  a.  Wlieii  it  stands  at  the  end,  the  vowel  'a'  is  added. 
In  Akaii  it  is  also  used  without  the  jn-efix,  and  before  the  final  'a' 
tiie  letter  r  is  inserted. 
E  d  e  h  n  t  i  ;i  (Ak.  s e  n'  t  i  r  a)  V  /r//  // ':'  1  > e  ii  't  i   n  a   w  ('.  k  n  ?  n't///  do  i/oii  (jo';' 

2.   Tlic  postpositions   so  and   ho   arc   also   used   to   express   raifse. 
Cf.  §240,  <^  248,^/.  Jlem.l. 

Ye  da  no  irayaniye  so  a  s  e,   /re  thanli  Itim  for  his  kindness. 
Mat  n  a  no  ne  I)  o  n  e  s  o  k  a  w,  J  //./",'  re/rarded  him  for  Jiis  erit  deed. 
(_)'sfi  nenna  ho,  he  ici'.eps  on  (/■■oiint  of  his  tirolhei'. 

i  t2^«      ( Hher    nouns    of   jilace,    fre(jiiently    ser\ing   as    jiostpositinns 
(and   adverlis),   are  the  following: 
ati'fi:    1.  the  toj)   (of  the  human   head,  of  a   house,   nionntaini; 

2.  the  place  ahore. 
eti:   1.  tJie  head,  the  upmost  jxirl;  2.  /////  fliief  /itare. 
in  fininifini,    tlie  midst,  the  centre  of  a  thing  or  jilace. 
likyeii,   nkyenrnn,  the  side-part:    th<'  ptnre  hi/  the  side  of  a   tliiiui. 

(Jko  ne  nkyen,  he  (/oes  to  liinr   (Jte  ne  iikyen,  he  tives  uitit  him. 

Ofi  ne  nkyeii   k  o,  lie  (joes  away  from  liim. 
(nsa)  nifri,   nil'a   so,   on   the  ri'jhl  hand  or  side: 
(nsa)   beiikuni,    beiiknin    so,   on   the  left  hand,  or  side. 
agya,   tJa]  }>((rt  hryond :  agya-noho  (or   -nolinai,    tn'//(a/i/ : 

aboiiteii   no  agya,   tlie  olhrr  side  of  the  si  reel : 

asnogya.  the  olhrr  side  of  the  river: 

ayaiiny;i,   tlie  /larkside  of   the  liiiman   tmdi/  (lit.   of  tlie  hellij). 


§  123.  124.  THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECfl.  81 

ntdm',  the  space  between;  between,  betwixt. 
n  t  e  n  t  e  11  s  6,  the  place  opposite ;   over  afjainst. 
nsrenso,  the  place  at  a  distance  \  aloof. 
ananjmu,  in  the  feet  i.  e.  footsteps;  instead  of. 

III.  OTHER  NOUNS,  PRONOUNS  ANT)  ADVERBS  OF  PLACE. 

1S3.     1.  Of  the   names  of  the  diflferent  memhers  ov  parts  of  the 

human  body,    we   have   had  some  among  the  nouns  of  place 'and  re- 

lation''(§  119.  122),  viz.  e'm  u,    eho,    ano,   ani,    anim,    akyi,  atifi, 

eti,  nkyen,  nifa,  benkuni.    But  some  of  these  and  other  such  names 

are    considered    as  thiiuis  having  their  own  dimensions,   and   may    be 

combined  or  compounded  with   m  u,  so,   and  other  jiostpositions;  e.'^g. 

ti  so,  tiri  so,  tirim';  anim';  asom';   anom'; 

esem'  [the  inner  snhstance  of  the  teeth,  but  also  the  space  of  the 

mouth  inside  the  teeth);  ese  akyi  [the  outside  of  the  teeth,  revealed 

by  withdrawing  the  lips) ;  k  6  n  mu  ;  n  k  y  e  n  m  u,  m f  e  m" ;  y  4  m' ;  n  s a  va, 

nsayam'  (the  palm  of  the  hand),  nsaakyi  {the  back  of  the  hand), 

n  s  a   ano,    n  s  a  t  e  jI  ano. 

Some  such  names  are  only  used  as  compounds,  as  if  they  were 
mere  jjlaces: 

mpampam',  momaso,  ataso,  dodom',  mmotoam', 
yam',  ayaase,  ayannya. 

2.  Others  are  named  as  things,  but  may  be  treated  as  pilaces,  with- 
out assuming  the  postposition  mu  or  so;  e.  g. 

Ode  bo  too  nemmati,  he  put  a  stone  (on)  his  shoulder. 
Oyare  nese,  nekomd,  nemmerebo, 
'  he  is  sick  (concerning  or  in)  his  teeth,  his  heart,  his  liver. 
0  s  0  n  e  n  s  a,  he  seizes  his  hand,  holds  him  by  the  hand. 
Otim'  no  amenewa,  he  took  him  (by)  the  throat. 

124.    1.  'i'he  following  names  of  things  also  in  a  direct  way  de- 
note a  place,   without  having^a  noun  of  place  added  to  them : 
ofi,  ofie,  a  dwelling,  home;  akura,  a  village;  sukti,  school; 
adi,  adiwo,  adiwo  ho,  the  space  outside  the  room,  yard. 
Bera  mefi!  come  (into)  7ny  house!  Cf.  Bera  me  ddh   mu!  come 
into  my  room! —  Waba  ofie,  he  has  come  home;  but:  Wahyen 
ofi  bim',  he  has  entered  some  dwelling.  —  Ote  adiwo  ho,  Mat. 
26,69.;  but:  ogyina  abannua  no  so,  Ester  6,  5.  —  Oko  akura, 
he  ivent  to  the  plantation-village;  but:   Oko  n'afiiw  mu,  he  went 
into  his  plantation.  —  Ofi  suku   bae,  he  came  from  school;  but: 
Oko  suku'dan  mu,  he  goes  into  the  school-house  (not  for  the  pur- 
pose of  learning). 

2.  Properjiames  of  countries  and  towns  want  no  postposition;  some, 
however,  are  used  or  compounded  with  m  u,  so,  as  e,  k  u  r"o  m'  (=  ku- 
row  mu);  e.  g. 

6 


82  ETYMOLOGY.  §  125. 

Ofii  Abrokyiri  baa  Abibirim',  lie  came  from  Europe  to  Africa. 
Oti  Nkran  faa  Krgbo  ne  Akwam'  koo  liuam',  ansjiaa  osaii 
fa  a  A  k  y  e  m  koo  A  s  a  n  t  e,  n  a  o  f  i  K  u  m  a  s  e  f  a  ^  P  r  a  s  6  baa  0  g  ii  a', 
he  went  from  Akra  through,  Kroho  and  Akwam  to  Krepe,  then  he 
returned  and  went  hi/  ivay  of  Ahem  to  Asante,  and  from  Kmnase 
(he  went)  hy  Praso  to  Cape  Coast.  Ote  Den  a,  lie  lives  at  Ulmina. 
Mereko  Adukurom',  1  am  going  to  Adnkrom. 
3.  Nouns  compounded  iviOi.  a  noun  of  place,  though  they  may  partly 
be  considered  as  names  of  things,  cannot  well  assume  a  new  post- 
position of  place;   e.  g. 

w  i a s e,  tlte  ?rorld ;  a  f  i a s  e,  a  cellar,  store, prison ;  m  p o  a  n  6,  the  seashore; 
fam'  =  fa  mu,  in  tli,e  ground,  usually:   on  tJie  ground,  at  the  holtom. 
Oda  afiase,  he  lies  in  prison.  Cf.  Oda  duam',  he  lies  fastened  to  a  Uock. 
But:  Oko  aguaasem'  =  oko  guam',  he  goes  into  the  assembly,  council. 

135.  Mere  names  of  place  (not  at  the  same  time  names  of  relation 
or  of  things)  are : 

1.  bji,  baw,  bea,  bew,  bere,  amere;  all  these  signify  a  place,  but 
are  (with  the  exception  of  baw)  only  used  with  some  addition,  as: 
babi,  Ak.  beabi,  pi.  mmea-mm(^a,  mmii  nhina,  amere  (fi),  §60,3. 
or  in  composition  with  verbs,  as:  gyinabea,  trabere,  dab  ere, 
dabew,  a  place  to  stand,  sit,  lie  (there). 

Ade  yi,  mihhu  netobew,    1  knoiv  not  tvliere  to  lay  this  thing. 

2.  o  fa,  (the  one)  side  (also  meaning  the  half  or  part  of  a  thing),  and 
a  fa,  a  separate,  unoccupied  part  of  some  space. 

Wo  koo  bepow  bi  so  fa  babi,  they  went  on  a  mountain  apart. 
Oda  a  fa,  he  sleeps  on  the  other  side  (of  the  room). 
Minnim  fako  a  gwg,  I  don't  know  {the  place)  where  lie  is. 
Wonam  afasa  koo  kurow  no  mu, 
they  tvent  into  the  town  from  three  sides. 

3.  Nouns  derived  from  verbs  by  the  palatal  suffix  (§  36,  4). 
adidii,  eating-place;  ote  adidii,  he  sits  at  table', 
anome,  drinking-place;  aguaree,  ivashing-place ; 

akoe',  a  field  of  battle;  anisiei,  burial-place;  asutwaree,  a  ford; 
mmehe,  mmenkyene,  nearness,  neighbourhood. 

4.  All  these  nouns  of  place  do  not  take  postpositions  of  place,  with 
the  exception  of  bere,  when  it  means  time,  see  §129,1.,  and  fa, 
which  is  often  compounded  with  m'  =  mu. 

Owo  me  film',  he  is  on  my  side,  belongs  to  my  party. 

5.  The  four  chief  points  of  the  compass  have  the  following  names: 
apuei,  apuei-fam',  anim-fam\  (anafo,   boka),  east; 
atoe,  atoe-fam',   aky  I'r  i-f  Tim',   (atifi,   anai),  west; 
k(ise-fam\  nif;i-frim',   (epom'),  south; 

kusu-fam\  behkum-fam'.   (eham',   kwaem'),  north.. 
Hem.   The    names  in    parenthesis  do  well  for  the  Gold  Coast,    but 
cannot  be   applied  to  other  countries   and  parts  of  the  globe. 


§  1 26-121).  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  83 

ISO*  Nouns  of  action  may  be  used  like  nouns  of  places.  As  ko 
asu  means  to  (JO  to  the  water  (place),  to  (jo  for  water,  so  some  other 
phrases  have  been  formed,  as: 

kg  any  An  (Ak.  F.  ko  nnyina),  to  <fO  for  ivood,  fuel; 

ko  asikfl,  to  go  for  diifcfing  and  wasltinxj  (fold. 

These  seem  to  be  exceptional  formations.  But  more  fre(|nently  we 
find  an  infinitive,  often  with  its  object  before  it,  or  compounded  with 
it  into  one  word,  as  a  complement  of  place.     See  §  280,  2. 

O'kg  adidi,  aguare,  asgre,  lie  goes  to  dinner,  to  take  a  hath,  to 
prayer   (or  to  clmrcli).     Okoo  aduan'-to,  he  tvent  to  huy  food. 

127«  Instead  of  nouns  of  place,  the  pronouns  ehe,  ha,  ho  &.c. 
(§  60,3)  may  be  used.     We  must  add  to  them: 

no  ho,  nohoa  (nohofi),  tJw  place  beyond,  heliind. 

Th.e  pronouns  ha  and  ho  are  often  added  to  nouns  of  place  in 
apposition,  or  just  as  no  or  yi  is  added  to  names  of  persons  and 
things;  yet  no   or  yi  may  be  added  besides. 

Owg  turom'  ho,  he  is  in  that  garden. 

Yete  dan  (yi)  mu  ha  yi,  we  dwell  in  this  house  here. 

Oko  Nnon  kom'  noho  tonn,  he  went  far  into  the  inland  countries. 

128-  As  a  proper  adverh  of  p)lace,  not  derived  from  nouns  or 
pronouns,  but  from  a  verb  with  a  postposition,  we  have  to  mention: 
fahofaho,  in  the  expression:  Wofa  faliofaho,  tliey  sail  {oy  row) 
along  the  shore-,  whilst  Wgfa  a  no  an  6  means:  they  w  alii  {or  ride, 
drive)  along  the  shore  {hy  land). 

IV.  NOUNS  AND  ADVERBS  OF  TIME. 

129*  Nouns  of  time.,  used  in  answer  to  the  question  when?  da  ben?, 
either  have  postpositions,    or  they  have  none. 

l.For    the  entirely  abstract  notion  of  time  in  general,    as  in   ^Time 

flies"'.,  there  is  no  proper  word;   all  expressions  are  somehow  definite 

Ebere,  time  (cf.  §  125)   wants  a  definition  by  an  attributive  word 

or  sentence,   and  can  take  the  postposition  so  (or  mu). 
Adagyew,  leisure,  can  have  mu  after  it. 
Ohene  no  here  so,  in  the  time  of  that  king. 
Eb^re  a  Kolombo  kohi'iti  Amerika  no  mu, 

at  the  time  in  which  Columhus  discovered  America. 
M'adagyew  mu  adwiima  ni,  this  is  a  tvork  of  my  leisure-time. 
2.  Nouns  expressive  of  the  ages  of  human  life  are : 

nkokoabere,  hahyhood;  m  m  er  ant  ebere,  mmabilbere,  youth:, 
nkwakorabere,   mmerewabere,  old  age; 

they  may  have  mu  after  them;  but 
mmofraase,  childhood,  admits  no  postposition. 


Si  ETYMOLOGY-  §  1^^- 

3.  Afe,  afrihyia,  i/ear,  gsram',  gbosom',  month,  and  the  native 
and  European  proper  names  of  the  months,  also  eda,  day,  may 
have  mu  or  so  after  them;  but  not  so  the  proper  names  of  the  days 
of  the  week,  §  41,  4. 

4.  The  nouns  for  the  seasons  of  the  year  usually  take  mu  after  them, 
ope  (be  re),  ofiipe,  apenimma,  g  pep  on,  the  harmattan  and  its 
divisions,  asu  so  w  (here),  adom  (adommere,  ad  ommiiro  w'), 
the  rainy  seasons.  [F  e  f  e  w  -  b  e  r  e,  spring ;  ah  6  h  u  rube  r  e,  summer ; 
a  wo  where,  ivinter.]  Exception:  m-penoa,  autHmn,  or  rather  (Ak.) 
the  end  of  the  harmailan. 

5.  Dapen,  iveeTc,  takes  mu  after  it. 

6.  The  following  nouns  for  the  different  times  of  the  day  (partly  com- 
bined with  adjectives)  are  mostly  used  without  postpositions: 
adekyee  ne  adesae;  akokgbohe,  ahema,  ahemadakyg, 
an  op  ah  em  a,  angpatutu,  adekyee,  awiapuei,  an  op  a,  awia, 
owigyinae,  awia  kete,  betwabere,  mfaretiibere,  ah\vum- 
mebawmu,  ahwummere,  awiatge,  anadwofa,  anadwofa 
fomm,  adesae,  anadwo,  gdasii  kgnkgh,  gdasum'. 
Likewise  the  words  for  the  twelve  hours:   dgrikoro...  §80.4. 

7.  Other  nouns  of  time  are  formed  by  the  palatal  suffix  (§36,5.)  or 
by  composition  with  here,   ase,   akyiri;  e.g. 

a d i d i i,  a d i d i b e r e,  meal-time ;  adidiiase  mpae,  prayers  at  meals ; 
a  d  i d i i  k y i r i  a s e  d  a,  thanJcsgiving  after  7neals. 

130.    Other  expressions  of  time  are   the   following   nouns,    nouns 
with  additions,  proper  adverbs  and  particles: 

1.  For  t\\e  present  time: 

ene,  nne(=edayi),  mpren,  to-f/rt?/;  ene  da  yi(ara)  so,  this  very  day; 
n  nans  a  yi,  nna  yi  mu,  in  these  days;  afei,  now; 
sese'  (sese,  when  at  the  end),  just  now,  this  moment:  [at  once; 

seseiara,  mpreh,  mprempr eii(ara),  preko,  immediately^  fortJncith, 

2.  For  the  past  time: 

'nera  (mispronounced:  'nara,   'ngra,  =  ene  da),  yesterday. 

'n  e  -  n  n  a  n  s  a,  'n  e  -  n  n  a  n  n  a  n, . . .  'n  e  -  d  a  d  u,  three,  four, ...  ten  days  ago. 

nnansa  ni  a...,  it  is  three  days  since...;  afedan  ni,  a  year  ago; 

nna  no,  nna  no  hi,  the  other  day;  da  hi,  once,  one  day; 

d  a  b  i h g,  formerly ;  e h  g  b e r e  no,  then,  at  that  time ; 

tete,  tetebeme,  tete-nterede,  anciently,  of  old; 

dedaw,  dedadedaw,  already,  long  ago. 

3.  For  the  fidure  time: 

g ky e n a  (g  k a  u  a),  to  morrow ;  gkye  n  a  k y  i,  the  day  after  to-morrow; 
gky6na  bi,  dakye  hi,  some  day  to  come,  some  time,  hereafter; 
da  se  'ne  (Kwasi,  Dwo, ...)  this  day  week  (on  Sunday,  Monday); 
afedan  sese,  a  year  hence. 


§  ]31.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  85 

4.  For  an  indcfvnite  time: 

p  c n ,  once ;   da,  d  a  b i ,   d a  b  i  a r  a,    d  a  b i a r a d  a,    d a  k  6 r o    b i ,    some 

day,  one  day,  one  time,  anij  day,  ever,  after  a  negative  verb :  never ; 

eto-dabi-a,  sometimes;   (lit.  it  falls  i.e.  happens  some  day  that). 

5.  For  succession  (and  simultaneousness)  : 
preko,  at  the  same  time,  at  once;  cf.  1. 
ntem,  ntemara,  (quickly,  %  131,3),  soon; 
amonom'  (ho)ara,  on  the  spot; 

kan,  ekan  no,  (at)  first,  formerly;  kdh  ansa,  beforehand; 

kankyer ekyere,  first  of  all,  at  the  very  first; 

ntam'  (no),  in  the  mean  time; 

[enna  (en 6  na),  then;  ansa-na,  whereupon;  these  are  conjunctions]; 

akyi    (postposition  of  nouns),    after;    akyiri,   behind,  afterwards; 

the  time  after ;  eno  akyi,  eyi  akyi,  akyiri  no,  akyiri  yi,  san- 

kyiri  yi,  after  that,  hereafter,  afterwards. 

6.  For  repetition: 

mpen  a  he?  how  often?  see  §81;   bio  (blow,  Ak.  biem'),  again; 
nna  nna,  nn  akor  o-nnako  r  o,  on  single  days;  da,  often; 
da  nnaawotwe,  da  sram',  da  afe,  every  week,  month,  year. 

7.  For  duration: 

nna  ahe?  how  many  days?  how  lonrf?  dakoro  &c.  §80,5.6. 
da  (F.  dab  a),  dayi,  dap  em,  da  da,  always,  continually,  eternally. 
dabidabi,  a  lomj  time;  ara,  on  and  on,  continually,  continuously. 

V.  NOUNS  AND  ABVEBBS  OF  MANNER  AND  DEGREE. 

1.   Nouns,  singly  or  with  postpositions. 
ISl.  Nouns  of  qucdity  without  postpositions,  but  more  frequently 
such   or    other    (also   personal)   nouns   together  ivith   the  postpositions 
mu  or  so,  may  denote  mcinner  in  an  adverbial  way. 

1.  Abstract  nouns  added  to  the  verbs  se,  to  be  equal,  kyen  or  sen, 
to  surpass,  showing  the  manner  or  concern  in  which  a  subject  equals 
or  sui-passes  an  object,  see  §  2.35  c.  Concrete  nouns,  used  adverbially 
to  show  the  means  of  an  action,  see  §  237  a. 

2.  Some  nouns  are  not  or  scarcely  used  otherwise  than  in  an  adver- 
bicd  way;  e.  g. 

a  b  i  a,  to  one's  aid  or  assistance ; 

abira,  the  wrong  zvay,  ttirned  the  other  way. 
Mey  e  no  adwiima  abia,  I  worh  for  him  in  the  ivay  of  helping  him. 
Mi  so   no  mu  abia,  /  set  my  hand  to  it  assisting  him. 
Wahye  n'atade  abira,  ha  has  put  on  his  garment  the  wrong  way. 
Wabo  (or  waka)  asem  no  abira,  he  has  reversed  the  matter  (in 

stating  it),  altered  it  to  the  contrary. 
Yedino  ad  anna  n'  or  nnyigye,    we  do  it  alternately,  hy  turjis. 
Rem.  In  bo  abira,  di  adannan,    di    nnyigye,    the   nouns    may 
be  called  specific  complements  of  the  verbs  bg,  di;  on  the  other  hand, 


86  ETYMOLOGY.  §132.133. 

many   nouns,    appearing    as    eomplemonts  of  verbs    in    specific   verbal 
phrases  (§210),  may  be  considered  as  adverbs  of  manner. 

bo  piriw  (bo  pirim),  bo  mpunimpQ,  to  startle', 

bg  bum,  bo  twi,  bo  wi,  to  start,  he  alarmed; 

to  beraw,  to  dobosa,  to  piti,   to  faint  or  swoon 
(from  ejoJiaustion,  sunstroke,  hunger). 

3.  The  noun  ntem,  quickness,*'  is  used  as  an  adverb  either  singly  or 
doubled,   or  (as  oh  are,  lirfldness,  swiftness)   compounded   with  so. 
Bera  ntem!  come  quicM^l  Obae  ntemntem,  he  carne  verij  quick. 
Wobaano  ntem  so,  they  came  with  haste.  LuJc.2,16. 
Oye  n'ade  iihina  ohareso,  he  does  all  his  things  stviflli/. 
*Cf.  Akyekyere  se:  ntem  ye  na  ogom  ye, 

the  tortoise  sccys:  quickness  is  good  and  slowliness  is  good.  (Prov.) 

A.  Oilier  nouns  compounded  with  so  or  mu,  sometimes  also  ase,  a  no, 
to  express  manner,  are  the  following  : 

kwan  so-kwah  s  o,  ak w  an  s  o  -  a  k wahso,  orderli),  properly; 
aberanso,  akakabenso,  akokobiriso,  violently; 
anibianndsoso,   asobiannasoso,  carelessly; 
mpasompaso,  mpaase,  mpofirim',  unawares,  unexpectedly, 
mm  a  rim  am',  mmarimaso,  in  a  manly  ivay,  manfully; 
n  nip  am",  after  the  mcinner  of  men;  onyamemii,  in  a  godly  way; 
brofcnn',  brofo  nsa  ano,  after  the  fasbion  of  (lie  Europeans. 
OkdJi  asem  no  abufuw  so,  he  spoke  that  word  in  anger. 

2.    Proper  Adverbs  of  Manner, 
derivative  (from  pronoiins,  adjectives,  verbs),  primitirc,  or  <:o)nponnd. 
13!3.  l^ropier  adverbs,  besides  the  nominal  adverbs  in  §  131,  show 

1.  manner,  in  a  demonstrative  or  descriptive  way  fthe  former  by  com- 
parison, the  latter  by  naming  a  quality) ; 

2.  degree,  or  quantily,  intensity  and  extent; 

3.  certainty  and  uncertainty,  affirmation  and  negation. 

133,  1.  Adverbs  of  a  pronominal  cbarwler,  showing  manner  of 
an  action  or  state  in  a  demonstrative  way  or  implying  comparison, 
are  the  following: 

sa,  sa,  se  (=sa  yi),  se  (=se  eyi),  .so,  thus;  saara,  just  so. 
Ete  sa,  so  it  is.    Woyeno  se!  it  is  done  thus! 
Ete  saara,  it  is  just  SO,  slill  so,  always  the  same. 
Mentee  asem  a  ete  se    pen,  I  never  heard  such  a  tiling. 

2.  An  adverb  showing  degree  in  a  similar   way  is 

s  0  (=  se  biribi)  very,  very  much. 

Eye  se,  it  is  very  good.    Oye  hti  se,  he  is  very  cowardly. 

3.  Adjectives  denoting  quality  and  ''indefinite  quantily  are  frequently 
used  as  adverbs  of  manner  (a)  and  degree  (b),  either  in  equal  form 
with  the  adjective,  or,  when  several  forms  exist,  in  a  reduplicated, 
sometimes  in  the  simple  form.   Cf.  §  G7-70. 


§  134.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  87 

E.g.  nya,  slowlij;  te,  slraif/Jdivaij;  koram,  qiuetli/;  bone,  hadl/j; 
yiye,  pa,  ptipa,  p;'ipapa,  ivell,  ver//  well,  muoh ; 
kese,  deiinen,  bebre,  pi,  dodo,  I'erij,  mwli,  venj  mucJi ; 
kakra,  kakrabi,  kakrasr,  ketewabi,  a  little,  very  little, 
a.  On  am  nya,  he  ivalks  slowly.  Oda  ho  koram,  he  lies  there  quietly. 
Dua  no  a  si  fro  mm,  that  tree  is  in  a  flourish/ up  state. 
Ok  as  a  kronkroh,  he  speaks  with  purity. 
Ote  yiyo,  he  is  well.    Minim  no  yiye,  /  know  him  well. 
Mikyiano  pap  a  pa,  I  greet  him  most  heartily. 
^.  Mf'rama  bo  kese,  the  wind  Mows  vehemently. 
Op r anna    bom'  den n en,  the  thunder  rolls  loud. 
Osuro  bebre,  bebrebe,  pi,  dodo,  he  is  very  much  (ov  loo  much) 

afraid. 

4.  Adjectives  denoting  a  certain  quality  are  added  as  adverbs  of 
intensity  to  verbs  expressing  the  same  quality;  e.g. 

E&'o  kokuro,  it  is  very  large;  eye  papa,  it  is  very  good; 
ebere  ko,  ebiri  tumm,  ehoa  fita,  akyen   kyenkyeren, 

it  is  very  red,  -black,  -white,  -hard  or  stiff; 
ebon  k {ink an,  it  stinks  very  much. 

'134»  1.  Proper  descriptive  adverbs,  mostly  primitives,  not  (or  only 
seldom)  used  as  adjectives,  but  showing  quality  (or  degree)  like  those 
in  §  133,  3.,   are  found  in  the  following  sentences  : 

O'fwc  no  do  (or  ha,  =dinn,  komm),    he  looks  at  him  staringly. 

M'ani  tuaa  no  fanh,  my  eye  discerned  him  distinctly. 

Emu  da  ho  fe,  it  lies  open  and  plain  (before  us). 

Eda  nsu  ase  fe,  it  lies  deep  under  the  water. 

Wahye  no  ke'te  (kyenkyehkyen),  he  has  commanded  liim  strictly. 

Awia  afi  kete  (ketekete),  the  sun  has  come  out  shining  brightly. 

Nktirofo  no  aboaboa  won  ho  cl  n  o  pepe,  pitipiti, 
tli,e  people  are  gathered  thvk  togetlier.  Luk.  11,  2D. 

Wo f wee  no  pitipiti,  they  flogged  hi)n  much. 

O'y en'adebasabasa,  bisibasa,  sakasaka,  sesasesa,  potoro- 
potoro,  he  does  his  things  in  a  disordely,  confused  manner. 

2.  Imitative  adverbs  show  the  manner  of  an  action  by  describing 
the  effect  as  a  particular  noise  or  other  impression  on  the  senses. 
Oboome  bam  (bam bam),  he  gave  me  a  lash  (some  lashes). 
Efwee  fam'  ara  bam,  it  fell  to  the  ground  with  a  clap. 
Ofwee  ase  brim,  he  fell  down  plump. 
O'si  pim  (pim  pim),  he  steps  firmly,  takes  firm  steps. 
Otia  fam'  twem  twem  twem,  he  treads  on  the  ground  strongly. 
Ohuriiw'  tweh  twen,  or,  fen  fen,  he  jumps  about  nimbly. 
Nsu  so  ko(ko),  water  drops  audibly. 
Aduah'  no  huru  kutukiitu,  tJi.e  food  boils  lustily. 
Anoma  no  pere  kitikiti,  putuputu,  the  bird  struggles  desperately . 
Ogya  dew  fr  afra,  framfr  amfr  am,  kitikiti,  kyirikyirikyir  i, 

the  fire  burns  brightly. 
Dade  no  ado  s r a m s r a m,  s r a n s r  a h,  the  iron  is  red-hot. 


ETYMOLOGY.  §  134. 


3.  Proper  advcrhs  of  degree  or  extent  (primitives,  derivatives  and 
compounds)  show  the  extent  of  au  action  or  state  in  various  ways : 

a.  Adverbs  UinititHf  the  action  to  itself  or  to  some  subject  or  object 
(excluding  others)  are  the  following: 

nko,  nkuto,  nkuto-kore,  Only,  alone;  nva,  just,  even,  mareli/; 
kwa,  teta,  hunu,  Ak.  huii,  F.  gyan,  gyennyan,  merehj,  solely; 
tela  ara  kwa,  icithout  any  thing  else. 

Mm  of  r  a.  nko  na  ewui,  children  only  died. 

M;itu  no  fo  nk5,  I  have  only  admonished  him. 

Wdma  me  nsu  teta,  he  gave  me  only  water. 

Woagyaw  me  nkiito-kore,   I  have  been  left  quite  alone. 

h.  Adverbs  stating  addition  (inclusion)  and  proniine)icy  or  exclusion 
(with  regard  to  other  actions  or  subjects  or  objects  that  might  come 
into  consideration)  are  the  following : 

nso  (nsoso),  bi,  nso  bi,  besides,  likewise:,  also,  too; 

mpo,  po,  even;  mm  cm,  rather„WHch  more; 

de,  taken  apart,  concerning; 

tftiriw,  especicdly,  chiefly  (adj.  fr.  ti,  tiri,  head). 

O'di  hid^  na  oyar^  nso,  he  is  poor,  and  sick  too. 

M6  nso,  meko  bi,  I  also,  I  shall  go  likewise. 

Fre  ono  nso  bi,  C(dl  him  also. 

Wabisa  ohene  po,  he  has  even  asked  the  king. 

Me  nud  po  anhfime,  even  my  brother  has  not  known  me. 

Eyi  mm 6m'  nye,  this  is  all  the  worse. 

Me  de,  m^ko,  as  for  tne,  I  shall  go. 

Mmofrd  na  oyare  no  kum  won  titiriw, 
children  especially  die  of  that  sickness. 
The  following  adverbs  are  derived  from  verbs: 

gye,  except,  save,  but;  wants  a  complement  after  it.  ^117  Bent.  23ob. 

Gyeobiiroui  na  obetumi  aje,  only  a  European  could  do  {it). 
(en 6)  gyabaw,  leaving  (that)  aside;  notwithstanding,  nevertheless; 
(eyi  nhina)    nkamfuaw,  beside  (all  this);  these  two  words  want 

a  complement  before  them.  %'i,4.'2.2Zlc.Luh.l6,26. 
enkanka,    nkantom'    (ak  an  torn    s  e),    to   say  nothing  of,    not   to 

mention  (that..);  these  two  words  want  a  complement  after  them, 

which  forms  part  of  a  sentence  that  follows  or  is  to  be  supplied. 
Mmofra  yi  ye  mmofraboue,  naenkank;tna  oyide  (6  nye), 

these  children  are  (all)  bad,  but  especially  this  one  (is  not  good). 
Nkran  bene  as 6  ntee,  na  iikantom  Biironi,  the  king  of  Akra 

ivas  not  apprised  of  it,  much  less  the  European  (governor). 
Rem.  The  adverbs  under  a.  b.  may  be  called  distingaishinq  adverbs; 
cf.  §  75. 

c.  Adverbs  extending  the  action  to  an  indefinite  or  a  more  or  less 
definite  degree  or  number,  or  to  completeness. 
ara*,  on  and  on,  by  degrees; 
ara,  continually,  continuously,  uninterruptedly ; 


§  135-138.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  89 

ara  g(y)enii,  pretly  ?nuch;  pv.inn,  (plainly,)  prelly  much. 
pe*,  pepo,   ejcarlly,  coniplefelij ]  pesc]*,  perfedhi ; 

Warn  a  me  dare  tin  pe,  he  (fare  me  exactly  or  only  (en  dollars. 
kora  (=kAva  ara),  entirely,  completely,  totally,  thoroughly, 

with  neg.  verb:  (not)  at  all; 
bi'iruburu,  boroboro,  tvvem,  twebo,  d\ve,  entirely,  totally  rt'v;. 
d\ve,  d\vchn,  d  were  be,  completely  d'C.  (of  burning,  destroying). 
*TIic  words  ara,  pe,   pese,  are  often  joined  to  other  adverbs. 

135.  Adverbs  of  certainty  or  uncertainty  {contingency,  possibility, 
prohahility). 

nokwdrem',  in  truth,  truly  (cf.  §131,4).    See  also  §236. 

pi,  ampd,  truly,  indeed;  ampaara,  ?;e/77^;  ampaneampa,  really; 
ewom'  pi,  ete  sa'  am  pa,  it  is  quite  true; 

de,  mmom'  de,  certainly,  indeed,  to  he  sure; 

dabi,  dabida,  no,  never,  hy  no  rneans.  (On  these  and  other  par- 
ticles of  affirmation  and  negation,  see  §  146,  3.) 

gyama,  Ak.  gyamea,  perhaps,  possibly  \ 

ebia,  some  of  it  (may  be)  that,  \.  q.  perhaps,  peradventure; 

sese,  perhaps  (=se  so,  like  this,  §133,1.  cf.  130,1.); 

sesekwa  (bi),  perhaps,  2>er chance,  by  chance. 

Gyama  wada,  perhaps  lie  sleeps.  Sese  wafi  adi,  perJiaps  he 
is  gone  out.  Ebia  oyare,  ebi  nso  a  wawu,  perhaps  he  is  sick 
or  perhaps  he  is  dead.  Kobisa  sesekwa  bi  na  yenfwe,  go 
and  ask  at  random,  that  we  may  see. 

VI.    NOUNS  AND  ADVERBS  OF  CAUSE. 

1S6.  1.  The  postpositions  nti  ('ti,  utia,  ntira),  so,  ho,  indicating 
cause,  see  §  121.240.  243  a. 

2.  The  adverbs  kwa,  teta,  hunu  (hun,  gyah,  gyennnyah)  §  134,3a, 
have  also  the  meaning:  without  cause,  for  nothing,  in  vain.  §  240 a. 

VII.  English  Adverbs  expressed  by  Verbs  and  otherwise. 

137.  English  adverbs  of  time  expressed  by  (auxiliary)  verbs,  see 
§  107,  13.  14.16-22.;  adverbs  of  manner,  ditto,  §  111.  Others  are  ex- 
pressed otherwise;  e.  g. 

Nil  nsii  de  a  ^ye,  enye  ano  bi  ni(lit.  the  Nile's  water'' s  sweet- 
ness ivhich  it  has,  there  is  not  '■any  border  is  here",  i.e.)  the  water 
of  the  Nile  is  exceedingly  sweet. 

M'ani  gye  a  egyei  nye  adewa  (lit.  my  eye's  delighting  which 
it  delighted  was  not  a  small  thing,  i.  e.)  1  was  highly  delighted. 

7.  CONJUNCTIONS. 

138.  Conjunctions  are  particles,  or  little  words  without  inflection, 
by  which  words  and  sentences  are  joined  together.  They  are  either 
X)rimitive,  or  more  or  less  plainly  derived  from  verbs,  nouns  or  pro- 
nouns.    We  divide  them  into  four  classes,  8  139-142. 


90  ETYMOLOGY.  §139-141. 

139*  (1.)  Conjunctions  that  connect  words  or  single  co-ordinate 
purls  of  senlences  are  the  following : 

ne,  and,  with,  from  the  v.  de,  to  hare,  hold,  possess. 

Me  ne  w6  beko  (orig.  medewo  bekg,  1  taJii)if/  //OH  shall  go), 
I  and  you  shall  ()o,  1  shall  go  with  yon. 

Wafre  me  ne  mo,  he  has  called  me  and  (or  together  with)  you. 
ene  is  used  instead  of  ne,   when  a  slight  pause  interrupts  the  close 

connection  between  the  preceding  and  the  subsequent  word; 

e=  the  prefixed  pronoun  of  the  3d  pers.   sing.  §  54. 
ana,  anase.  se,  or;  cf.  §  140  Mem. 2. 
..o,  ..o,  he  it..,  or;  cf.  §  140  iie;??.  5. 

Kofi  ana(se)  Yaw  n'kg  asii,  Kof\  or   Yao  shall  go  for  water. 

Mmariraa  6,  mmea  6,  mmofra  6,  won  nhina  mm  era, 
{he  it)  men  or  icomen  or  children,  they  all  shall  come. 
1-40.    (2.)  Conjunctions  that  connect  ro-ordinate  sentences: 
na,  and,  hut,  yet;  na,  for  (=hecause); 
(na  [sometimes  printed  in  italics:  na]  with  the  consocuti\e  form  of 

the  verb:  in  order  that,  with  the  intention  to;  see  §  141,  G) ; 
n'so  (nsoso),  also;  hut,  hesides,  yet,  however;  moreover; 
ndnso,  and  also,  hut  also,  hut,  yet,  however,  notuithstanding ; 
d  e   (a   concessive   particle    at  the  end  of  a  sentence),    with  nanso 

(following  in  the  next):  it  is  true,  take  it  for  granted,  hut..; 
ankcl..,  na..,  it  would  have  heen..,  hut..; 
enye..nk6,  nan'so  (na..nso),  not  only..,  hut  also..; 
enonti,  eyinti,  enti,  enti  n  a,   na  enti, 

hence,  therefore,  on  that  account; 
ene  so,   tluit  is;  so  it  came  that..; 
^nna  (=en6  n a),  then,  upon  tliat,  after  tlial; 
en'de  (=en6  de),  en'de  na,  then,  in  that  case. 
Rem.  1.  The  conj.  na  has  usually  low  tone,  but  Jiigh  tone  when  it 
connects  imperative  sentences.  On  na  see  §141,  7.  After  single  words 
at  the  head  of  a  sentence,  na  serves  as  an  emphatic  particle,  s.  §247. 
Mem.  2.    The  conj.    ana    at  the  end  of  a  question,  the  alternative 
being  omitted,  serves  as  an  interrogative  particle,  see  §  142. 

The  conj.  anase,  or  (§  139),   connects  also   co-ordinate  sentences. 

Oyare  anase  wad  a,  he  is  sick  or  he  sleeps. 
Mem.  3.  The  conj.  ..5,  ..o,  whether..,  or..,   connects  sentences  that 
are  co-ordinate  to  each  other,  but  subordinate  to  a  succeeding  sentence. 
Opene  5,  gmpene  o,  oye  na  meye  ara, 

whether  he  agree  or  not,  I  shall  do  (it)  hy  all  nwans. 

14:1.  (3.)  Conjunctions  that  connect  suhordinate  sentences  with 
principal  sentences,  are  simple  or  compound,  and  stand  between  the 
principal  and  the  subordinate,  or  the  subordinate  and  the  principal 
sentence.  In  the  latter  case,  i.  e.  when  the  subordinate  sentence  comes 
first  with  a  conjunction  at  the  end,  others  may  stand  at  the  same 
time  at  the  head  of  the  subordinate  or  of  the  principal  sentence. 

(Examples  see  after  1-10.) 


§141.  THE    PARTS   OF    SPEECH.  91 

1.  The  cxplanalon/  particle  sc,  thai,  whether,  if  (probably  clcrlv((cl 
from  s  e,  to  say;  Y.  de,  Gji  :  ake). 

A.  When  simple.,  it  is  used  in  the  following  ways: 

(L  It  is  joined  to  a  priiiripal  sentence  and,    usually  after  some   inci- 
sion marked  by  the  falling  tone  of  voice  (so)  or  even  a  little  pause 
(which    in    longer    sentences   is   indicated    by    a    comma   or  colon), 
connects  with  it  or  introduces 
a.  a  noun-sentence  that  supplies  the  suhject  or  a  complement  or  an 

attribute  in  the  preceding  sentence;  §  255, 1?;.  2.  3i^.  4.  6?;. 
/5.  an  adverbial  sentence  of  manner  (extent);  so  that,  §273,1/0. 
)'.  an  adverbial  sentence  of  purpose;  that,  in  order  that,  §279,1. 

b.  It  stands  at  the  head  of  a  conditional  or  concessive  sentence  (Gci : 
ke);  §276,3.  278,  2. 

c.  It  stands  at  the  head  of  an  adverbial  sentence  of  cause,  cf.  Tj,e. 

B.  It  is  combined  or  compounded  with  other  words  (verbs) : 

a.  kyere  se,  (in  order  to  see)  whether,  if  (in  rather  obsolete,  =se  ebia). 

b.  gye  se  (or  se  gyc),  except  that..,  §  277. 

c.  kyen  s  e,  seii  se,  more  than  (that..),  §  270,3. 
d.ei'i  se,  since;  §  265,  1. 

6'.  efise,  esiane  se,  or  se  alone  (A,  c),  with  nti  or  ntia  at  the 
end  of  an  adverbial  sentence  of  cause,  which  jirecedes  or  succeeds 
the  principal  sentence,  because;  §275,  1?;.  2. 

/'.  besi  se,  kosi  se,  kodn  se,   kgpem   se  &c.    ////,   until;  §265,2. 

ry.  k  a  uses  e,  thourjh,  even  if  §278,2.  CL  A,b.  [273,2. 

2.  The  comparative  particle  se,  as  (from  se,  to  be  like,  Ga:  tamo), 
and  combinations  with  it:  te  se,  asif;  senea  (se-dea,  lit.  like  that 
which),  just  us  (Ga:   take,  take  boni),  introduce 

a.  in  noun-sentence;  how  (relat.);  §  255,  led.  Sb.  5.  §  268,  c. 
&.  an  adverbial  sentence  of  place  (extent);  as  far  as;  §260. 

c.  an  adverbial  sentence  of  manner  or  degree,  succeeding  or  preceding 
the  principal  sentence  (which  in  the  latter  case  begins  with  SJi  na, 
saara  na.    sa  nso  n  a,  or  has  s  liar  a  at  the  end);  as,  just  a.s; 

§  268  a.  b.  270,  2. 

d.  a  member  of  an  abbreviated  or  elliptical  adverbial  or  adjective  sen- 
tence, §  248,  6.  269. 

3.  The  relative  particle  'a',  always  with  low  tone,  connects 

a.  a  succeeding  adjective  sentence  with  an  antecedent  in  the  principal 
sentence;  it  is,  together  with  a  pronoun  expressed  or  understood 
in  the  adj.  sent.,  translated  in  Engl,  by  the  relative  pronouns  and 
adverbs  wJio  (whom,  whose,)  which,  that,  tvhere,  when  &c.  §  64.  257. 

b.  an  adverbial  sentence  of  manner,  degree,  extent,  (Engl,  so  that,) 
with  a  preceding  sentence  or  some  part  of  it;  §  273,  1  a. 

c.  a  preceding  adverbicd  sentence  of  time,  §  262,  or  rondition,  §  276, 
or  concession,  §  278,  with  a  succeeding  principal  sentence ;  in  this 
case  it  has  usually  a  comma  after  it. 

4.  The  disjunctive  particle  6  is  used  for  'a'  in  double  or  manifold 
conditional  or  concessional  sentences;  §  276,4.  278,3. 


92  ETYMOLOGY.  §  141 

5.  The  distinguishing  adjectives  no  and  yi  (§74,2)  serve  as  connec- 
ting particles,  answering  to  the  Engl,  conjunctions   when,  after,  as. 

a.  The  dcDWJisiraiive  particle  no  is  used  at  the  end  of  adverhial  sen- 
tences of  time  with  the  verh  in  the  continuative,  past,  ])rogressive 
and  future  forms,  §  264,  also  at  the  end  of  an  adv.  sent,  of  pro- 
portion, §  272. 

?;.  The  demonstr.  part,  yi  is  used  in  the  same  cases,  with  the  verb 
also  in  the  present  and  perfect  forms;  §  263. 

C.  The  particles  ara  pe,  as  soon  as,  may  stand  with  or  without  no 
or  yi.  §  264, 1.  2. 

6.  '^riie  conjunction  na  with  the  verb  in  the  consecutive  or  impera- 
tive form,  tliat  he  maij  or  shall,  might  or  should,  connects  an  adv. 
sentence  of  purpose  with  a  preceding  principal  sentence;  §279,2. 

7.  The  conjunction  na  (with  high  and  low  tone)  indicates  smw/^rt- 
neousness  or  concomitance,  or  emphasis,  and  is  used  at  the  head  of 
the  principal  sentence,  when  the  action  or  state  in  it  coincides  with 
a  state  or  action  in  the  preceding  subordinate  sentence;  §  262,  2.  276,  2, 
It  is  not  translated  in  English. 

8.  The  particle  a  h  k  a,  eventuallij,  then,  in  that  case,  is  put  at  the 
head  of  the  principal  sentence  after  a  conditional  sentence,  the  predi- 
cate of  which  is  conceived  as  not  real,  but  only  imaginary.  §  276,  5. 
(cf.  §  2hlRem.2.) 

9.  The  particle  ansa,  before,  combined  or  compounded  with  na, 
introduces  an  adverhial  sentence  of  time  stating  an  event  subsequent 
to  that  of  the  j^rincipal  sentence;  §  266, 1.  The  same  particle  at  the 
end,  together  with  the  conj.  na  at  the  head  of  a  sentence  joined  to  an 
antecedent  principal  sentence,  may  be  translated  by  till,  until;  §  266,  2. 

]  0.  The  verb  m  a  serves  as  a  causative  particle,  =  so  that,  connec- 
ting an  adverhial  sentence  of  extent,  by  which  an  effect  or  conse- 
quence is  stated,  with  a  preceding  principal  sentence;  §273,16'. 

Examples  of  the  ixse  of  these  conjunctions,    with  the  verbs  ba  and 
ko,   one  in  the  subordinate,  the  other  in  the  jjrincipal  sentence. 
1.  A.  a.  a.  Ohoe  kokae  se  abofra  no  aba  (or  mm  era), 
he  ivent  to  tell  that  the  hoy  has  come  (or  shall  come). 
/i.  Okoe  ntemtem  se*obi  remma  n'akyi  rametiw' no,  Ae  ^t^c/^i 
very  quick,  so  that  nobody  tvill  come  after  him  pursuing  him. 
*  or  better :  a,  cf.  3  b. 
y.  Okge  se,  osah  ba  a,  ode  neba  besah  aba,  he  went  that  in 
returning  he  might  bring  his  child  back  with  Jiim. 
Okgo  ho  se  neba  mmera  ho  hi, 

he  ivent  to  that  place  that  his  son  migh,t  also  come  thither. 
&.  Se  woko  ho  a,  meba  ho  bi,  if  you  go  there,  1  shall  come  there  too. 
6'.  Se  woko  nso  a,  obi  bob  a,  though  you  may  go,  another  will  come. 
S.a.Kn  kofwe  kyere  se  (=se  ebia)  obeba, 
go  and  look  whether  perhaps  he  will  come. 
6.  Merenko  gye  se  woaba  ansa, 

I  shall  not  go  except  (or  until)  you  have  come  first. 
C.  Obekg  asanom  mmom'  sen    se    gbeba    abeti6    as^m,    he  will 
rather  go  to  drink  ivine  (strong  drink),  than  come  to  listen. 


§  141.  THE   PARTS   OF    SPEECH.  93 

£?.  Efi  se  obaa,  kurom"  ha,  ohkoo  babi  da, 

since  he  came  inlo  this  town,  he  never  went  anyivhere. 

e.  Efise  oba  ha  dii  nti,  menta'  meriko  ne  fi, 

hecause  he  often  comes  hither,  I  do  not  often  go  to  his  house. 

/'.  Ob6kg  n'anim  ara  akosi  se  n'adamfo  beba  abehyia  no, 
lie  will  go  onward  until  his  friend  will  come  to  meet  him. 

g.  8e  gba  a,  meko,  if  (it  happens  that)  he  comes,  I  shall  go. 
Kansese  gba  a,  mekg  ara,  though  he  come,  I  shall  go  still. 

2.  a.  Mekg  makofwe  seneawgde  pgnkg  no  fihyenmu  bebaf'am, 

/  cwn  going  to  looJc  how  the  horse  will  he  hro'wjht  from  the  ship 

to  the  land. 
&.  Senea  Kristo  som  ab  eterew  iihin  ii,  wgnkg  iVkgsom  ab  osom 

bio,    as  far  as  Chrisiianity  has  spread,  they  do  not  serve  the 

fetishes  any  more. 
6'.  Se(nea)  yeanifa    fwe    amma  wiase    no,    sa    nso  na  yeremfa 

fvve  rikg  (or:  se  yeremfa  f  wen  kg  neri),  as  we  have  hrought 

nothing  into  this  world,   so  we  shall  also  take  nothing  icith,  us 

in  going. 

3.  a.  O  nip  a  k  wgwoono  baa  wiase  yi,  obefi  mu  a  kg  bio, 

a  man  that  has  been  horn  into  this  u^orld  will  go  out  of  it  again. 

/>.  Waiikg  ntemntem  a  obi  rentumi  mm  a  n'akyi    mmetiwno 

nto   no,   he  did  not  go  so  very  quick  that  nohody  could  come 

after  him  to  pursue  and  overtake  him. 

c.  Wo  b  a  ara  p  e  a,  y  e  b  e  s  i  m'  a  k  6,  as  soon  as  you  come,  we  shall  start. 

Woba  raenkyen  a,  m6  ne  wo  bekg  m'afu  w  rail,  «'/?e/*  (or //^ 

you  come  to  me,  we  will  go  together  into  my  plantation. 
Ob  a  mehkyen  nso  a,  merehkg  nefi  da, 

though  he  come  to  me,  1  shall  never  go  into  his  house. 

4.  Se  gba  5,  se  gmmd  o,  me  d  e,  mekg, 

whether  he  come  or  not,  I  for  my  part  shcdl  go. 

5.  rt.  Obae  no,  mekge,  wlien  he  came,  I  went  away. 

Akofo   foforo   toa    so    reba   abegu   ran   no,    nanso  wgrekg 
wgri  anim  akgpam  dgm  no,  the  more  new  champions  came  for 
reinforcement,  the  more  they  went  onward,  repulsing  the  enemy. 
7>.  Waba  yi,  mekg,  as  he  has  come,  1  shall  go. 
c.  Obae  ara  pe,  na  mekge,  as  soon  as  he  came,  I  tveni  away. 

6.  Merekg  'ne  na  gkyena  masah  maba, 

I  am  going  to-day  that  1  may  come  hack  to-morrow. 
Kg  na  g foforo  mmera!  go  that  another  may  come! 

7.  Oreba  no  (or  yi),  na  merekg, 

whilst  he  was  (or  is)  coming,  I  ivas  (or  am)  going  away. 

8.  S  e  gba  a,   a  h  k  a  mekg, 

if  (or  in  case  that)  he  should  come,  then  I  would  go. 

9.  Mekge  ansa-na  gbae,  I  went  away  hefore  he  came. 
(Perhaps  better:   Onnya  mmae  no,  na  mekge.   Cf.  Mekge  no, 

na  onnya  mmae,  when  I  went  away,  he  had  not  yet  come) 

10.  Mekg  m  {i  gfoforo  abesi  m'ananmu, 

i  shall  go  thai  another  may  take  my  place. 


94  ETYMOLOGY.  §  142-145. 

1-lS.  (4.)  Inlerrogalive  particles  are  the  following: 
(/.  at  the  head  of  a  sentence:  so,  en  o,   as  a; 
J),  at  the  end  of  a  sentence:   ana?  anil?  a? 

So  greninia  kora?  will  he,  then,  not  come  at  all? 

En  6  dab  eh  na  obeba?  at  what  time,  then,  will  he  come? 

Asa  e  h  e  n  li  w  6  r  e  k  o  n  a  w  6  b  o  a  b  o  a  w  o  h  6  ? 
hut  where  will  you  fjo,  preparing  yourself? 

Obeba  yehhkyeh  ana?  ivill  he  come  to  us  (or,  sell,  not)? 

Kofwe  se  owo  fie  an;i?  go  and  look  whether  he  is  at  home. 

Yebenja  aduah'  wo  kwah  mii  a?  shall  w'e  get  food  on  the  way? 

8.  INTERJECTIONS. 

14S.  Proper  intcrjertions  are  exclamatory  sounds  expressing  any 
sudden  emotion  of  the  'mind  or  irish  that  has  not  grown  into  a  definite 
thought. 

We  add  to  them  a  number  of  improper  interje'iions,  consisting  of 
single  words  or  even  short  sentences  and  contractions  of  such ,  that 
are  used  in  colloquial  intercourse.  — 

Imitative  sounds  of  processes  in  nature  or  of  actions  have  been 
treated  under  the  head  of  adverbs,  §  134,  2. 

144.  Enclitic  sounds  giving  C7nphasis  are: 

e  (after  names);  o  (after  sentences);    e   (after  a  wish  or  command; 

see  also  §  91,  3.  170);  a  (after  an  emphatic  assertion  or  wish  ;  §  75,  2.). 

The  three  former  usually  absorb  a  previous  'a'.    E.  g. 
K  w a d  \v  6  e !  A  d  w  6'  e !  §  45,  2.  B  e  r'  o !  m  6  m  m e r'  6 !  m  6  m  m  e r'e!  come! 
Ko  6!  mohko  o!  kg  e!  mohko  e!  go!  Wok 6  a!  tliey  are  gone! 

143.  1.  The  following  exclamations  are  expressive  of  feelings, 
\\z.  pleasure,  joy,  admiration,  satisfaction,  exultation  (cf.  146, 2): 

a,  ha,  haha,  e,  ye,  6;  wie,  ayo,  gsempa! 
displeasure,  annoyance,  regret,  ahhorrence : 

a,  S.,  6,  o,  a  6,  kose! 
sorrow,  grief,  pain: 

a\,  ai,  boe,  boboe,  agy'e,  mirewu(o)! 
surprise,  astonishment : 

hai,  (moyfe  den'  ni!)  ao,  (se  woaye  no  ni !)  ei,   (ade  ben   ni!)  boe! 
Shouts:  ho,  liu,  w6,  ye,  me! 

2.  The  following  acclamations  express  also  a  desire  concerning  others : 
Ccdls  for  attention:  ha!  fwt;!  f  weof  \v  eo/ tie!  munti'o! 
Expressions  of  contempt:  a,  hCi,  twea,  twea!  of  challenge:  i'e  ! 
Utterances  in  chasing:  hae,  hae!  in  cursing:  kai! 
Husliing  words:  gytie!  gyae  a!  munnyae! 


§   146.  147.  THE   PARTS    OF    SPEECH.  95 

T46.  The  following  particles  and  phrases  may  b(^  called  colloquial 

mlerjeciions : 

1.  InterrogaUre  particles,  sec  §142. 

2.  FicpUes  of  affirmation,  apjyrohution,  assent,  ronscnt: 
yiw\  yie,   wie,  e,  eh'e,   boe!  pes!  cf.  §  145,1. 

t  \v  6  (t  w  e  w),  t  w  e  b  e  w,  t  \v  e m,  t  \v  e b e  m,  of  course,  exactly! 
ampa!    wom'moa!   F.  wiintwa  apdw!    Ky.  etera   (=ete   sa), 

indeed,  truly,  recdly!  you  are  right!  you  speak  true!  so  it  is! 
n'aiika!  wJuU  else?  pa  fwi',  he  it  so! 

3.  Beplies  of  negation : 

dabi,  no,  orig.  never;  this  word  stands  as  the  only  remnant  of  a 
tvhole  negative  sentence,  e.  g.  w o k g y  ho  pen  ana?  (m e n k o o  h g) 
dabi!  have  you  ever  heen  there?  no  (viz.  1  did  not  go  there  any  day)  I 

dab  id  a,   no,  never  (=dab  iar  ada) ! 

n'n  0 6 !  e h e e  F.  6 h 6 6 !  no! 

4.  Interjections  of  politeness,  to  introduce  a  saying  by  way  of  e.r^^'wse.- 

tafarakye,  sebe(w),  sebeo. 

147.  Salutations  and  their  replies: 

1.  In  approaching  to  a  dwelling  &c.  (by  night):   ago!    reply:  ame! 

2.  At  meeting  in  the  morning,  about  noon,  in  the  evening: 
nakye!  maha!  mad  wo!  =memawo  akye,  aha,  adwo, 

I  give  you  good  morning,  good  day,  good  evening !  Or : 
lueneawo!  duenewia,  duenenwin'o! 
I pily  you  concerning  the  cold  -  the  sun  -  the  coolness] 

3.  At  parting  in  the  night:  nnopa,  nnop'o  (me  mil  wo  nnapa),  (1 
wish  you)  good  sleep!  reply:  da  yiy6,  monna  yiy'6!  sleep  well! 

4.  At  parting  after  a  visit :  m e k  o  m  a  b  a  (§112); 

minnyaw  w'  ase,  /  don't  leave  you  alone! 
At  parting  for  a  journey:  menkye!  I  shall  not  stay  long! 
reply:  nantew  yiye,  farewell!  nkye!  nkyer' o!  don't  stay  long! 

5.  For  ivelcoming:  ab-o  (aba  o)!  akwaba! 

6.  At  meeting  on  the  way:  ahyia!  reply:  ahyiahyia! 

to    or  of  one  that  went  before:  adikano! 
At  sitting:  atraase(o)!  at  eating:  aguare  o! 
At  eating  or  at  ivork:  kit  am'!  lay  hold  of  it! 
reply:  mifuano!  I  hold  it! 

7.  Congratidations:  mo!  mo  rao!  woay(e)  ade!  wotiri  nkwa! 

8.  Condolations:  kose!  due!hyeden!  darekauci! 

'd.B.eplies  on  different  salutations:  ya  aberaw!  (or,  ya  ahenewa,  ya 
anyaado,  ya  obere,  ya  amu!  to  the  members  of  different  families, 
distinguished  by  the  worship  of  different  family  fetishes);  ya  ouua; 
ya  adwo!  (orig.  to  one  born  on  Monday,  as  ya  ayisi!  to  one 
born  on  Sunday,  ya  bena,  ya  wuku,  ya-6,  ya  afi,  ya  amen  !  to  one 
born  on  'J'uesday,  Wednesday  &c.   cf.  §41,4). 


m 
di 


96  SYNTAX.  §148-153. 

PART  III. 

OF  SENTENCES  (SYNTAX). 


148.   A  sentence  is  a  complete  tJioupht  expressed  in  words.  — 
In  every  sucli  expression  there  is  1st,  a  thing  of  which  we  speak, 
the  siihjecf,  and  2dlj,  what  we  say  of  it,  the  predicate. 

Different  Kinds  of  Sentences. 

140.  The  predicate  may  assume  the  form  of  an  assertion,  or  a 
ivish,  or  a  command,  or  a  question,  or  an  exclaniation,  each  of  which 
forms  may  be  affirmative  or  negative. 

Accordingly  we  distinguish:    1.  indicative,  2.  optative,  .3.  imperative, 

4.  interro() alive   and  5.  exclamatory  sentences. 

150.  (1.)  Indicative  sentences  contain  an  assertion;  as, 
Onyankopoii  boo  ade,  (rod  created  (all)  things. 

Dua  biak6  n'ye  kwae,  one  tree  does  not  make  a  forest. 

151.  (2.)  Ojitaiive  sentences  express  a  wish,  either  in  the  form  of 
an  indicative  sentence,  usually  with  the  addition  of  certain  particles;  as, 

Wobewu!  ynayest  thou  die!  Se  wobekum'  obonefo  a!  Ps.  139,19. 
Se  anka  wiinim  nea  efa  wo  asomdwoee  ho  a!  Luk.  19,42. 
Se  anka  okari  na  wokari  m'aAverehow  e!  JohG,2. 
0,  se  mewo  ntaban  se  abrgnoma  de  e !  Ps.  55, 4. 
A,  anka  woatwitvva  won  agu  p6!  Gal.  5,12. 
Manya  tekrema  apem  e!  0  for  a  thousand  tomiues! 
or,  in  the  form  of  an  imperative  sentence,  §  152. 

152.  (.3.)  Imperaiive  sentences  contain  a  command,  exhorlation, 
wish  or  perynissioyi,  in  the  negative  way  a  warning,  wish  or  prohi- 
Intion;  as, 

Do  wo  yoiiko  se  woho!  love  thy  neigJibour  as  thyself! 

Ko,  na  likoye  bone  bio!  (jo,  and  sin  no  more! 

Mma  wo  were  mmfi  me!  do  not  forget  me! 

Me  bd,  fa  wo  koma  ma  me!  my  child,  give  me  tliy  heart! 

153.  (4.)  Interrogative  sentences  contain  a  question,  which  re- 
quires either  a.  an  affirmative  or  negative  reply  to  the  whole  sentence, 
or  1).  the  statement  of  the  subject,  object  or  any  other  member  of  the 
sentence.  In  both  cases  the  collocation  of  words  is  the  same  as  in 
indicative  sentences ;  but  in  the  former  case  interrogative  particles  are 
used,  see  §  142,   in  the  latter,  interrogatiA'e  pronouns,  see§60.  Gl.   K.g. 


§154.155.  SENTENCES.  97 

a.  Wo  ^gya  wo  oiie  sinji?  is  your  father  at  home? 

So  oremma  ha?  will  he  not  come  here? 
h.  Hena  na  khk'^  who  is  come?    O'se  deiV?  what  does  he  say? 

Woato  ntama  ofeii  ?  ivJmt  kind  of  stuff  have  you  howjht? 

Woreku  he?  (or:  eh6  na  woreko?)  whither  are  you  (joiiif)? 

The  interrogative  tone  of  the  sentence  ah>ne  may  suffice,  or  the  last 
sound  of  the  sentence  is  lengthened  and   sinks  into  the  low  tone.  E.  g. 

Woheye  yen  kwankyerefo  aky  Wasa?  will  yOH  lead  us  on  to  Wasa? 
Om'}  na  nuibu  no  fo-oV  him  you  pronouwe  (juilty? 

Sometimes  an  assertion  is  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  question,  which, 
then,   requires  no  answer.  E.  g.  ]\Iat.  6,  25.  7,  16. 

Oka'ra  n'sen   aduaiV  ana?  is  not  the  life  more  than  meat? 

So  wotetew  brodomA  wo  akrate  so?  do  meti  gather  figs  of  thistles? 

Imperative  sentences  also  may  be  interrogative.,  in  which  case  an 
antecedent  sentence  may  be  considered  as  omitted  5  as, 

Meniniera  ana?  sltall  I  come?   So  yenko  bi?  sliall  we  go  too? 
Cf.   Ose  memmera  ana?  does  lie  say,  1  shall  come? 
So  wope  s»3  yenko  bi?  do  you  nush  us  to  go  likewise? 

1*>4.  (5.)  Exclamatory  sentences  express  a  feeling  (of  joy,  grief, 
regret,  displeasure,  astonishment  &c.)  in  the  form  either  of  an  indi- 
cative or  of  an  interrogative  sentence;  as, 

Nhyira  ne  ghene  a  onam"  Awurade  din   so   reba!  LuJc.l9, 38. 

Onyame  ayamye  so  den   ara !  Jiow  great  is  (rocfs  goodness! 

Structure  of  Sentences. 
155.  Sentences  are  either  simple  or  compound. 

1.  A  simple  sentence  usually  contains  one  subject  and  one  predicate. 
When  both  are  simple,  the  subject  consisting  merely  of  a  noun  or 
pronoun,  and  the  predicate  merely  of  a  verb,  we  have  a  hare  simple 
sentence-.,  e.g.  Onipa  kasa,  (a)  man  speaks.  Obi  sii,  somebody  weeps. 

When  one  of  them  or  both  are  enlarged,  the  subject  by  an  attri- 
bute or  attributes  (§  183-197),  and  the  verb  by  one  or  more  comple- 
ments or  adjuncts  (§  1 98-243),  we  have  an  enlarged  simple  sentence. 

Rem.  Two  or  more  subjects,  two  or  more  verbs  (one  the  principal, 
the  other  an  auxiliary  verb),  and  several  complements  or  adjuncts, 
may  be  combined  in  the  same  sentence,  which  is  called  contracted, 
when  any  of  the  combined  parts,  together  with  the  other  members 
of  the  sentence,  might  form  an  independent  sentence.  Such  sentences 
are  treated  as  simple  sentences.  §  245. 

2.  A  compound  sentence  is  a  combination  either  (a)  of  two  or  more 
co-ordinate  sentences  (§  249-253),  or  (b)  of  one  or  more  subordinate 
sentences  with  a  principal  sentence;  the  latter  kind  is  also  called  a 
complex  sentence  (§  254-280). 


98  SYNTAX  §156.157. 

SECTION  I.     SIMPLE  SENTENCES. 


CHAPTER  I. 
The   Subject. 


The  Simple  Snhject. 

ISO.  The  simple  subject  is  a  noun  or  pronoun  in  the  nominative 
case,   which  usually  precedes  the  predicate.  E.  g. 

Obofo  aba,  a  messenger  has  come.  Osu  to,  ruin  falls,  i.  o.  //  r((ivs. 

Obi  screw,  somehodt/  laughs.    Eyi  nye,  tliis  is  not  (jood. 

When  the  subject  is  one  of  the  personal  pronouns  mentioned  in  §  53, 
it  is  prefixed  to  the  verb.  E.  g. 

Oye  abofra,  fie  is  a  hoy.  Ycsuro,  we  are  afraid.   Wosii,  ificij  u'cep. 

1»>7.  The  impersonal  pronoun  e  (prefixed  to  the  verb)  stands  for 
the  subject  (besides  the  cases  in  wich  it  naturally  stands  for  a  pre- 
vious name  of  a  thing  or  things  or  persons)  — 

1.  When  the  thing  in  question,  though  it  turn  out  to  be  a  person 
or  persons,  has  not  been  clearly  known  or  stated  before;  e.  g. 

Hena  na  onam  hgV  eye  ghene,   u-lio  icalfcs  iliere?  it  is  ilic  k/iKj. 
Den  na  ekekii  neho  wo  wura  nom'  ho?    eye  mmofra  bi, 
wfuit  moves  lliere  in  Iftat  h/isfi,Y  it  is  some  children. 

2.  Before  certain  verbs,  called  impersonal,  the  real  subject  of  which 
is  expressed  after  the  vei-b,  or  is  left  indefinite  ;  e.  g. 

Esono  adwuma  (iiko),  na  esono  agoru, 

worli  and  play  are  different  Ifrinys.  Of.  §  199,  5. 
Efanim  eyi,  na  emfanim  eno,  tfiis  is  comparatively  less  had  lha)i  that. 
E'pa  anyinam,   it   liyhiens.    Eye  anadwo,   it  is  night. 
A'ka  me,  1  atn  left;  aka  nam,  meat  is  wanting.  Ct  §  bA  Hem.  1. 
Ese  wo  anigye,  na  enye  aniwu,  joy  heromes  yon,  not  sliame. 
Etwa  no  se  oko,  fie  must  go.    Etware  no,  he  faints. 
(Of.  Adiiru  no  atware  no,  the  medicine  has  made  fiim  faint.) 
Ehia  me,  (it  straitens  me)  1  am  in  a  strait,  in  distress. 

Rem.  1.  In  the  two  last  examples  the  subject  in  English  has  become 
the  object  in  Tslii.  This  is  also  the  case  in  some  other  phrases,  e.g. 

Okom  (osukgm,  awgw)  deme,  lit.  hunger  (lfiirst,cold)  fiolds  (seij:es) me, 
i.  e.  I  am  fiungry  (tfiirsty,  1  feel  cold). 

Ehti  aka  me,  fear  fias  strucJc  me,  1  am  afraid. 
and  when  the  verb  in  Engl,  is  in  the  passive  form  (§  165  JRem.),  e.g. 

Wgafre  no,  tfiey  fiave  called  Jiim  =  fie  fias  been  called. 

Hem.  2.  In  examples  like  the  following :  Ehia  me  sika,  1  am  in  want 
of  mo)iey;  A'ka  me  biribi,  1  am  wanting  somelliing, —  it  may  be  que- 
stioned whether  sika  and   biribi  are  subjects   or   adverl)ial  adjuncts. 


§  158-161.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     SUBJECT.  99 

1,>8.  The  suhject  of  the  verb  ne  (§  102,  1)  may  excliange  its  po- 
sition for  that  of  the  nominaiive  complemenl  of  the  predicate  (§199,1),  i.  e. 
the  subject  may  stand  before  or  after  the  verb.  E.  j^. 

O'ne  ohene,  or :  ohene  neh  =   ne  no,  he  is  (he  Jciufj. 

Oyi  ne  bene,  or:  ohene  ni  =  ne  oyi,   this  (onej  is  the  king. 

Double  Expression  of  the  Subject. 
ItSO.    1.  The  subject  is  expressed    by  the  pronoun  e,    prefixed  to 
tlie  verb,  and  a  noun  after  the  verb,  in  part  of  the  cases  mentioned. 
in  §  157. 

2.  The  subject  is  put  by  itself,  preceding  the  sentence  to  wbicli  it 
belongs,  and  afterwards  taken  up  by  its  corresponding  pronoun,  by 
way  of  emphasis;  see  §  247,  1. 

3.  When  in  the  utterance  of  a  sentence  a  pause  or  interruption 
intervenes  between  the  mentioning  of  the  subject  and  of  the  verb 
belonging  to  it,  the  corresponding  pronoun  is  prefixed  to  the  verb. 

Onipa  no,  ommae  e,  that  man,  he  has  not  yet  come. 

Omission  of  the  Subject. 
IGO.    1 .  The  pergonal  pronoun  w  o   before  the  (first)  imperative  is 
omitted.  §  90,  5.  91,9. 

2.  The  pronoun  e-  falls  off  before  the  pi-efix  a-  of  the  perfect  tense 
and  the  consecutive  form.  §  ^AMem.l.  58,6.  89,  7. 

8.  'Jlie  pronoun  e-  is  sometimes  omitted  by  negligence ;  e.  g.  before 
the  impers.  verb  ka;     ci'.  §  21G,  5  Bern.  E.g. 
Ka  (=  Eka)  me  nko  a,  anka  mekg, 

if  I  alone  was  left,  i.  e.  as  for  me,  I  should  po. 
Oyare  bebgo  no,  kokunicl  (=  ka-kiimfi,  ekaa  kuma)  mfi  own, 
a  sirkness  hefell  him,  that  he  almost  died. 

4.  The  pronoun  e-  (or  wo-)  is  also  omitted  in  beye  (se),  beboro, 
introducing  an  approximate  number,  weight  or  measure.  §  175,  2.  E.  g. 

Nnipa  beye  du  behyiaa  ho,  ahout  ten  persons  assemhled  there. 
Owo  nk(')ko  beboro  aduonu,  he  hds  prohahh/  more  than  twenty  foivls. 

5.  On  the  omission  of  the  subject  before  successive  verbs  belonging 
to  the  same  subject  (in  contracted  sentences),  see  §  245,  2.  (253.)  253** 
258,  2-5.  276'\  2. 

Compound  Suhjeds. 

lOl.  1.  The  subject  may  be  enlarged  J >y  attributes,  see  §183-197. 
—  A  peculiar  kind  of  compound  subject  are  the  specific  subjects  of 
verbal  phrases  mentioned  in  §  215.  217. 

Hem.  The  subject  may  be  expanded  into,  or  expressed  by,  a  sen- 
tence; see  §  255,  1. 

2.  The  subject  is  twofold  or  manifold,  when  two  or  more  co-ordi- 
nate subjects  are  united   and  have  a  common   predicate;    sec  §  245,  3. 


100  SYNTAX.  §162-164. 

CHAPTER  II. 
The  Predicate. 


103.  The  predicate  of  a  sentence  asserts  of  the  snl)j('ct:  irJidt 
it  is,  hoir  or  in  u-lud  state  it  is,  irhal  it  does  or  sJxdl  do,  or  all  tliis 
in  the  negative.  For  such  assertions,  verbs  are  used,  either  alone,  or 
together  with  other  words,  called  cowplenieids  and  adjimrts,  hy  which 
also  the  ohjects  concerned  by  the  action,  and  the  ptaie,  time,  manner 
and  cause  of  doing  or  being,   are  indicated. 

The  Simple  Fredicaie. 

163.  1.  The  simple  predicate  consists  of  one  intransitive  verb, 
which  by  itself  conveys  the  complete  sense  of  an  aiiion  '),  stnte  ")  or 
quality  ^). 

1 .  Mmarima  ko,  men  are  fufJitinp.     Mmofra  goru,  children  plaij. 
Anoma  tu,  a  bird  flies.  O'su,  he  weeps.  Wgserew,  tliey  lawfh. 
Ne  nko  nam,  he  walks  loneli/.    Onantew,  he  walks,  <joes  on  foot. 

2.  Oyare,  he  is  sick.  Wada,  lie  sleeps.  Wawu,  lie  is  dead. 

3.  Okwan  ware,  the  way  is  long.  Sika  here,  gold  is  red.  Eye,  it  is  good. 
Hem.  Intransitive  verbs  not  only  admit  adverbial  adjuncts  of  any 

kind  (§  221-243),  but  occasionally  they   admit  also  objective  '),  loca- 
tive -)  or  qualitative  ^)  complements. 

1.  O'sii  ne  nua,  he  bewails  his  brother.  Woserew  no,  theif  laugh  at  him. 

2.  Onam  ho,  he  walks  there.    Onantew'  fam',  he  walks  by  la^id. 

3.  Woko  nkoden,  they  fight  a  hard  fight.  Oyare  yarepa,  he  is  sick  of 
a  reed  sickness.     Owuu  wu-yawy4w,  he  died  a  painful  death. 
N'anim'  hoa  oyarehoa,  his  face  is  pale  with  a  sicklij  pcUeness. 

2.  The  simple  predicate  consists  of  one  transitive  verb,  when  the 
object  is  not  expressed,  but  easily  understood,  e.  g.  when  it  should  be 
a  pronoun  which  is  omitted  (§bQ  Hem.  1.202,  3).    E.g. 

Minim,  1  know  (itj.  Wahii,  he  has  seen  (it).  Ofae,  lie  took  (it). 

Compound  Predicates. 

164.  1.  The  predicate  may  be  a  combination  of  a  verb  ivith 
another  word  (a  noun,  adjective,  numeral  or  adverb,  single  or  con- 
nected with  other  words),  by  which  the  predicate  is  (a)  completed  or 
(ft)  extended. 

(a)  The  different  kinds  of  complement  see  §  198-220. 

(fc)  The  different  kinds  of  adjunct  see  §221-243. 

2.  The  predicate  may  contain  two  verbs,  of  which  one  is  the  prin- 
cipal and  the  other  an  auxiliary  verb,  each  of  which  may,  or  may 
not,  have  (a)  a  complement  or  {b)  an  adjunct  after  it.  The  auxiliary 
either  precedes  or  succeeds  the  principal  verb.  There  may  also  be  two 
or  more  auxiliaries  to  one  principal  verb.    Of.  §108-111.  245,  2rt. 


§  165.  166.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     PREDICATE.  JOl 

3.  Any  complement  or  adjunct  consisting  of,  or  containing,  a  noun, 
may  be  cidarffed  by  an  altrHmle  or  attributes.  §  183-197. 

4.  A  complement  or  adjunct  of  the  predicate,  or  an  attribute  in  it, 
may  also  be  expressed  by  (or  expanded  into)  a  sentence.  §  254-280. 

Uses  of  the  Inflected  Verbal  Forms. 

lt>3>  As  tlie  verb  either  contains  the  whole  predicate,  or  is  the 
prominent  part  of  it,  we  review  here  its  inflexional  forms.  Cf.  §  90-93. 

Bern.  The  passive  voice  of  the  English  and  many  other  languages 
is  supplied  in  the  following  ways: 

1.  by  active  and  transitive  verbs,  having  for  their  subject 
a.  the  noun  mentioned  as  the  agent  of  the  verb  ') ; 

Z^.  the  pronoun  of  the  3d  pers.  plur. -); 

C.  the  pronoun  of  the  1st  pers.  plur.  or  2d  pers.  sing.*); 

rf. the  specific   subject  of  verbal  phrases*); 

2.  by  intransitive  verbs  ^). 

l.Ohene  asoma  no,  he  has  been  sent  hi/  the  Jcinp. 

Onyankopon  nim  no,  he  is  Jcnoivn  of  God.  1  Kor.  8,  3. 
Onyame  ahu  mo,  ?/e  are,  known  of  God.  Gal.  4,  9. 

2.  Wgfre  no,  he  is  called.  Woahu  me  (mu),  I  am  known  (1  Kor.  13, 12). 
Wgwoo  Yesu  wo  Betlehem,  Jesus  was  horn  at  Bethlehem. 

3.  Yehii  adidi  ansfi-na  yehu  ade  pe,  eatinrf  is  known  before  acquiring 
of  riches  is  known.  Wukisa  ode  bebrebe  a,  epirim',  when  yam  is 
roasted  too  fnuch,  it  gets  hard. 

4.  Ani  ampa  won  mu  biako  so,  not  one  of  them  has  been  forgotten. 

5.  Ne  bii  ayera,  his  child  has  been  lost. 

Eho  nneema  nhina  sakrae,  every  thing  was  changed  there. 
Biribiara  nseee  e,  nothing  has  been  spoiled  yet. 
Dua  a  eto  nam  na  ano  hyew,  of  the  stick  by  ivhich  meat  is  roasted, 
the  foremost  part  is  burned. 

Present  Tense  and  Continuative  Form. 

166.  1.  The  present  tense  denotes  an  action  or  state  present  to 
the  speaker : 

a.  an  action  passing  at  the  time  iu  which  it  is  mentioned  {actual  present). 
Okasa,  he  speaks.     Onantew,  he  walks.     Qfre  me,  he  calls  me. 
Okyerew  nhoma,  he  writes  (or:  is  writing)  a  letter. 

b.  an  active  or  passive  state  I  e.  g. 

Ohome,  he  breathes,  rests.     Qyare,  he  is  sick. 
2.  It  denotes  an  action  or  state  not  confined  to  the  present  time,  but 
taking  place  alivays  or  at  any  indefinite  tiyne  (indefinite  present);  so 
in  the  subjunctive,  conditional  or  suppositive  mode  of  speaking.  E.  g. 

Onyankopgn  fvVe  nnipa  so,  God  looks  after  (or  cares  for)  men. 

Osu  to  a,  asase  ba  aduah',  when  it  rains,  the  earth  produces  food. 

Woyare  a,  wofwefvve  aduru,  n^hen  you  are  sick,  you  look  for  medicine. 

Se  gba  a,  fre  me,  when  or  if  he  comes,  call  me. 

Obisa  me  a,  ahka  mema  no,  if  he  woidd  ask  me,  I  should  give  him. 


102  SYNTAX.  §167-170. 

3.  It   denotes    an    action   repeated  at   any    given  occasion,   in  contra- 
distinction from  a  continuous  action  or  state  (iterative  present).  E.  g. 

O'ba  ha  da,  he  alwai/s  (or  often)  comes  here. 
O'da  ha,  he  uses  (to  lie  down)  to  steep  here. 
O'tJih  no,  he  hates  him  now  and  then.  Cf.  §  102,  6. 

4.  The  present  tense  is  also  used  in  describing  hahitual  actions  of  a 
past  time,  especially  in  connection  with  da.  E.g. 

Tete  Hellafo  agoru  a  da  mfriliyia  anan  na  wobegoru  wo  Oh'mpia 
no  mil,  Avode  nhwea  pi  gugii  bilbi,  na  mmerante  tutu  mmirika  fa 
so  ko  botae  bi  ho,  na  nea  odu  ho  kan  no  nya  abotiri...,  na 
nkurofo  bebre  no  de  ayeyi  bo  ose  fa  ne  ho.  "(Abasem  &c.  pag.  21.) 

5.  The  present  tense  is  used  for  the  preterit  (in  narration)  in  the  word 
se  (mise,  wiise,  ose  &c.),  introducing  the  words  spoken  by  somebody. 

Wobisaa  no  se:  wobeko  ana?  na  ose:  yiw\  meko! 

they  asked  him  saj/ing^   Wilt  thou  go  ?   and  he  said,  Yes,  1  will  go. 
Hem.  The  tone  of  the  present  tense  is  different  in  the  Akem  dialect; 
e.g.  Akuapem:  Mise,  Akyem:  me  see,  /  say. 

167-     The  contimiative    form    denotes    a    continuous    (imperfect) 

action,  state  or  quality,  without  regard  to  the  beginning  or  end  of  it, 

either  in  the  time    present  to  the  speaker,  or  in  the  past  time.    E.  g. 

Oda  ho,  he  lies  (is  lying)  there.  Otan  no,  he  hates  him  (uninterruptedly). 

Mekofvvee  no  no,  oda  ho,  ivhen  I  visited  him,  he  lay  (was  lying)  there. 

Kan  a  ote  ne  nkyen  no,    otan  no,  na  afei  de,  odo  no,  formerly,  when 

he  lived   (was  living)    with  him,  he  hated  (was  hating)  him,  hut 

now  he  loves  him. 

16S.  The  negative  forms  of  the  present  tense  and  the  continua- 
tive  form  are  not  distinguished  from  each  other  in  tone,  as  the  affir- 
mative forms.   E.  g. 

Onye  aboa,  he  is  not  a  heast.  Onye  adwuma,  he  does  not  work. 

Preterit  and  Perfect  Tense. 

169.  The  preterit  tense  expresses  an  action  performed  and  finished 
in  (a  point  of)  the  jiast  time,  ^»*6'!v'o?f.5  to  the  time  present  to  the 
speaker  (Engl,  past  tense)  or  previous  to  an  action  of  the  past  time 
(Engl.  2>ast  perfect).  E.  g. 

Obae  'nera,    he  came  yesterday.    Obae  no,  n'abusuafo  behyiaa  ho, 
ivhen  he  came  (or  had  come),  his  relations  assembled  there. 

170.  The  negative  form  of  the  preterit  implies  tliat  tlie  action 
has  not  yet  been  performed  in  the  time  present  to  the  speaker,  or  in 
the  time  of  another  action  of  the  past  time,  but  leaves  the  question 
open,  whether  it  will  be  or   was  performed  afterwards. 

Ommtie  e,  he  has  not  yet  come  (but  may  come  still\ 
Wowoo  Yesu  no,  na  Herode  nwiii  e,  when  Jesus  was  horn,  Herod 
had  not  yet  died.\ 


§  171-174.  SLMPLE    SENTENCES.     PREDICATE.  103 

ITl.  1.  The  perfect  tense  expresses  an  action  performed  and  com- 
pleted in  the  past  time,  but  continuing  in  its  results  or  effects  in  the 
time  present  to  the  speaker  (Engl,  perfect  tense,  perfect  or  complete 
present  tense),  or  in  the  time  of  another  action  of  the  past  time  (Engl. 
pluperfect,  perfect  or  complete  past  tense). 

2.  Sometimes  it  represents  a  past  and  completed  action  as  a  real 
fact  present  in  memory. 

3.  Sometimes  it  represents  a  present  state  with  reference  to  a  pre- 
vious completed  action. 

4.  It  denotes  liahitual  action,  in  the  description  of  the  manner  in 
which  some  procedure  is  performed. 

1.  Waba  'ne,  he  has  come  to-day  (and  is  now  here).  Wakg  asu  preko, 
he  has  gone  (and  returned,  or,  has  heen)  for  water  once. 

Odiiu  ho  no,  na  o\via  apue,  when  he  arrired  there,  the  sun  had  risen. 

2.  Osufo  kae  se:  Kanno  yen  na  yeatwa  nnua,  na  yen  yerenom  asoa 
nwora',  na  yede  ahyew  ama  Osubrofo,  na  wode  sraa  abah  no  ho. 

3.  Ne  ho  atew,  he  is  (^=has  hecome)  holy,  is  said  of  a  sinner;  but  v,e  say: 
Onyankopoh  ho  tew,  God  is  holy  (he  having  never  been  otherwise). 

4.  Tete  Misrifo  ka  efunu  akyenkyennuru  a,  na  woayi  ne  ti'rim  hoh  ne 
u'ayamde  afi  ne  mu,  na  wode  likyene  bi  ne  nnuru  ahye  amti  no, 
when  the  ancient  Egyptians  emhalmed  a  corpse,  they  took  the  brains 
and  howels  out  of  it,  and  put  a  kind  of  salt  and  spices  into  the  corpse. 

173.  The  negative  form  of  the  perfect  tense  implies  that  the  non- 
performance of  the  action  is  a  decided  fact  in  the  time  present  to 
the  speaker. 

Wamma,  he  has  not  come  (and  the  time  for  his  coming  is  now  past). 

Obiara  ank;i,  no  asera  bi,  nohody  told  him  any  tiling.    Mat.  22,  16. 

Progressive  Form. 

173.  The  progressive  form  represents  an  action 

a.  in  its  beginning  at  the  time  actually  present  to  the  speaker; 
h.  in  immediate  succession,  to  another  action; 

c.  in  the  progress  of  performance  in  the  present  time  or  simultaneous 
with  the  occurrence  of  another  event  (or  performance  of  another  action) 
in  the  present  or  past  time. 

a.  Osu  reba,  rain  is  coming.    Osu  reto,  it  is  beginning  to  rain. 

b.  Mereba,  I  shall  come  immediately.    Opete  te  fiinu  nka  a,  nil  oreba, 

when  the  vulture  perceives  a  carcase,  it  comes  (forthwith). 

c.  Orekyerew'  hhoma,  he  is  writing  a  letter. 
Mebaa  ne  nkyen  no,  na  grekaii  hhoma, 

when  I  came  to  him,  he  was  reading  a  book. 
Mereye  adwiima,  na  wo  nso,  wuregoru! 
whilst  1  am  at  work,  you  are  playing! 

174,  The  negative  form  of  the  progressive  is  also  used  as  a  ne- 
gative form  of  the  future;    see  §  177. 


104  SYNTAX.  §175-178. 

Future  Tenses. 

175.   1.  Tlie  I'trsl  fnliirc  represents  an  action  that  will  be  performed 
in  some  time  to  come,   or  an  action   intended.   E.g. 
Osii  beto  'ne,  it  ivill  rain  to-day. 

Okae  se  obeba  okyCna,  he  said  he  would  come  to-))iorroiv. 
2.  It  expresses  also  probability  in  estimating  the  number  of  something: 
Nnipa  'beye  se  ohk  na  ewo  ha,  men,  it  uill  he  (something)  like  i.  e. 

about  a  hundred  are  here. 
WAto  nkokg  bcboro  aduonu,    he    has  howjht  fotcls  (that)  irill  sur- 
pass (i.  e.  that  are  likely  to  exceed)  tu'enly. 

176»     1'he  second  future,  or  future  proximate,   denotes    a   future 
action  as  coming  on  certainly  and  immediately.  E.  g. 
Worebebd  mprempren,   they  will  come  immediately. 

177«  As  the  neyative  forms  of  the  1st  future  (o mm  eye,  or  con- 
tracted onnye)  and  of  the  2d  future  (or em m eye)  may  be  easily  con- 
founded with  the  ingressiiie  forms  having  the  prefix  be  in  the  negative, 
or  with  the  neg,  present,  or  with  the  affirm,  and  neg.  imperative,  the 
neg.  form  of  the  progressive  may  be  siibstituted  for  them.  E.  g. 

Osii  rento  ne,   there  will  he  no  rain  to-day. 

Consecutive  Form. 

IT 8.  The  consecutive  form  expresses  an  action  consecutive  to,  or 
resulting  from,  a  previous  action,  either  as  the  natural,  or  expected, 
or  intended  result  and  consequence. 

It  is  most  frequently  used  after  future  forms;  in  stating  a  series 
of  future  acts,  only  the  first  verb  is  used  in  the  future  form,  and  all 
the  rest  have  the  consecutive  form.   Cf.  §  250,  2. 

But  the  consecutive  form  is  also  used  after  any  other  form  of  the 
verb,  and  expresses  then  always  an  intention  or  expectation.  §  279,  2. 
(In  the  following  examples  the  preceding  forms  are  arranged  as  in  §  91.) 

1.  Yesere  wo  ama  ahiafo,  we  entreat  thee  for  tlie  poor. 

2.  Wote  ho  aye  (or  agye)  deh'V  you  are  sitting  there  to  do  (or  to 
receive)  what?  i.  e.  for  what  are  you  sitting  there  ? 

3.  Qy^e  na  wanya  ho  asem  bi  aka, 

he  did  it,  that  he  might  have  to  talk  of  it. 

4.  Wode  no  aba  ofie  na  woanya  no  afvieye, 

they  have  hroughthim  home,  that  they  might  he  ahle  to  tend  him  well. 

5.  Yereye  adwuma  na  ycanyii  biribi  adi, 

we  are  working,  that  we  may  get  something  to  eat. 

6.  Yebetu  abofo  afre  won  aba, 

we  shall  despatch  messengers  to  call  them.  Cf.  §  280,  IZ/. 

7.  Worebeko  akokyere  no,  they  will  now  go  to  catch  him. 

8.  Fwe  yiye  na  woasiw  no  asem  no  so,  na  ne  bo  anti'i, 

take  care  to  hide  that  matter  from  him,  that  he  he  not  dismayed. 


§179-181.  SIMPLE    SENTKNCES.     PREDICATE.  105 

9.  Sakra  me  kora,  na  masom   wo  da, 

rhanfie  wc  oitirdi/,  that  I  mny  serve  thee  for  ever. 

10.  Wommeso  yijri  niu,  na  ycatunii  awie, 

they  shall  come  and  help  ns,  that  ive  can  finish  it. 

170,  The  negative  form  of  the  consecutive  is  not  distinguished  in 
tone  from  the  negative  of  the  perfect.  E.  g. 

Woasiw  no  kwah,  na  wantumi  kmma,,  they  have  prevented  him,  that 

he  may  not  be  able  to  come;  or:  and  he  has  not  been  able  to  come. 

Mem.  Verbs  joined  to  ueyative  progressive  or  future  forms  without 

an  intervening  na,  do  not  assume  the  a-  of  the  consecutive  form. 

Obesaw"  nsu  anom,  he  will  scoop  water  to  drink] 

Oreusdw"  usii  nnom  bio,  he  will  no  more  draw  ivater  to  drinh. 

Imperative  Forms. 

180.  'i'he  imperative  forms  express  or  contain  a  command,  exhor- 
tation, pcruiission,  wish  or  entreaty,  implying  that  not  the  subject  of 
the  action,  but  some  other  subject,  desires  or  permits,  or,  in  the  nega- 
tive form,  prohibits  the  action  expressed  by  the  verb.  Ily  the  first 
imperative  a  single  person  s])oken  to,  is  addressed  directly.  The  second 
imperative  in  all  persons,  sing,  and  plur.,  expresses  an  indirect,  in  the 
2d.  pers.  plur.  also  a  direct,  command  &c. 

1.  pers.  O'se:  mehko  (yenkg)  asi'i,  he  says:  I  {we)  shall  (jo  for  water. 

2.  pers.  O'se:  Ko  (monko)  asu !  he  says:  (jo  (you  shall  yo)  for  water. 

3.  pers.  Ose:  ohko  (wonkg)  asu,  he  says:  he  (they)  shall  cjo  for  water. 
In  a  question,  the  second  imperative  may  also  be  used  in  the  2d  p.  sing. 

Menko  ana?  SJiall  1  (jO  (according  to  the   will  of  the  person  asked, 

or  of  a  third  person)? 
Wohko  ana?    Shalt  thou  yo   (according   to    the    will  neither   of  the 

person  asking,  nor  of  the  person  going,    but  of  a  third  person)? 

181»  A  causative  imperative  form,  compounded  with  ma  is  fre- 
quently used  (cf.  §  91,  10.  107,  25.);  e.  g. 

Ma  menko,  lit.  yive  or  grant  1  may  go,  i.  e.  let  me  go. 

Om'ma  menko!  he  shall  let  me  go! 

Memma  wonkg  ana?  (shall  J  give  you  may  go)  shall  ]  let  thee  go? 

O'mma  wonkg  ana?  shall  he  let  thee  go? 

Ma  yenkg!  bera  na  yenkg!  bera  ma  yehkg!  let  us  (two)  go! 

momma  yehkg!   mommera  mmii  yenkg!    let  us  (more  than  two)  go! 

gmma   mohkg!  he  shdl  let  you  go!  womma  monkg  they  shall  I.  y.  g. 

gmma  (womma)  wgiikg!  he  (they)  .shall  let  them  go. 

Ma  mehkasa,  let  me  speak;  gmma  niehkasa,  he  shall  let  me  speak  &c. 

In  the  Akem  dialect  the  construction  of  this  compound  imperative 
is  different:  The  subject  of  the  principal  verb  is  made  the  object  of 
the  auxiliary  verb  m  a ,  and  the  principal  verb  is  without  the  nasal 
prefix  of  the  imperative  (at  least  after  the  2d  pers.  sing.).  E.  g. 

Ma  no  kg!  let  him  go!  qvamk  no  kg  {or  hkg?)!  he  shall  let  him  gol 


106  SYNTAX.  §182-187. 

182»     All  tiepative   imperative    forms   add   a    nasal    prefix    to    the 
affirmative  forms.  E.  g. 

O'se:  meniiko  (yennko)  asu!  he  scnjs,  1  (ivc)  shall  not  go  for  water. 
Ose:  hko  asu!  he  says,  thou  shall  not  pa  for  water. 
W6se:m6niVko  asii!  they  sap,  you  shall  not  go  to  the  water. 
Mennko  ana?  shall  I  not  go?  WoniVko  ana?   shall  thou  not  go? 
IMma  mennko!  let  me  not  go,  or,  do)i't  let  me  gol 
Ommma  mennko!  he  shall  not  let  me  go! 


CHAPTER   III 

Attributes. 


1S3.  The  suhjed,  when  consisting  of  a  noun,  may  be  enlarged 
by  attrihutes;  but  also  any  other  noun  in  the  sentence,  be  it  a  com- 
plement or  adjunct  of  the  predicate,  or  even  itself  an  attribute,  may 
be  enlarged  by  attributes. 

1811:.  Attributes  of  nouns  are  1.  the  adje<:t/re  and  numeral;  2.  the 
noun  in  apposition;  3.  the  noun  or  pronoun  in  the  possessive  case-, 
to  the  latter  belong  nouns  with   postpositions. 

1.  The  Attributive  Adjedive  and  Numeral. 

185.  The  adjectival  attributes  of  nouns  are 

a.  adjectives  of  qucdity  and  quantity^  h.  numerals; 

c.  distingnishing  adjectives ;  d.  emphatic  particles. 

They  are  put  after  the  noun  to  which  they  ai-e  referred.  E.  g. 

a.  bepow  kese,  a  large  mountain;  nnua  bebre,  many  trees; 

h.  nnipa  oha,  a  hundred  men;  nhuan  du,  ten  sheep: 

c.  dua  yi,  this  tree;  odah  no,  tliatJionse;  asu  ben,  what  (which)  river. 

d.  ghene  nko,  the  king  only  (or  alone);  abofra  po,  even  a  cliild. 

186.  When  several  of  these  four  kinds  of  attributes  are  used,  they 
follow  each  other  in  the  given  order  a.  h.  c.  d.  E.  g. 

dua  kokuro  yi,  this  large  tree;  abofra  ben  ara,  whatever  child; 
nnipa  trene'  basa  no,  those  three  righteous  men; 
ade  foforo  abien'  no  hko,  those  two  new  things  only. 

187.  1.  The  adjective  of  quality  is  often  so  closely  connected  with 
its  noun,  that  it  changes  the  tone  of  the  noun,  and  assimilates  its 
nasal  termination,  if  it  has  any,  the  noun  may  also  lose  its  termina- 
ting syllable,  or  the  adjective,  else  used  in  a  reduplicated  form,  its 
first  reduplicated  syllable.  In  such  cases  the  noun  and  adjedive  are 
considered  as  compounds  (either  perfect  or  imperfect,  §30,1.  2.).  E.g. 

.Apan-nedaw  =  apam  dedaw',  the  old  covenant;  gde-amono  =  ode  mo- 
mono,  raw,  unboiled  yam ;  anrimmono,  enam  momono,  fresh,  raw  meat; 


§  188-190.  .      SIMPLE   SENTENCES.     ATTRIBUTES.  107 

ohenkese  =  ohene  kese,  a  great  king;  ohemforo,  see  §  70,  2. 

2.  Nouns  and  numerals  compounded  iu  a  similar  manner,  see  §  80. 

3.  Nouns  or  pronouns  and  adjective  pronouns  compounded,  see  §  60- 
viz.  oniko,  gyako,   d«ebeh,   dekode,    adi,    eliayi,    ehono,    babi,    tako, 

dabeh,   dabi,  dayi,  se. 

4.  Substantive  and  adjective  pronouns  compounded  with  ara,  see  §  60.  74. 

188.  1.  When  tu'O  attributive  adjectives  of  quality  are  referred  to 
the  same  noun,  they  are  either  merely  put  together,  or  connected  by 
the  conjunctions  ne  or  anase.  E.g. 

Odah  kese  foforo  bi  si  ho,  a  large  new  house  stands  there. 
Ohftu  biribi  tuntum  ne  fita,  he  saw  something  black  and  ivhitc. 
Wobeto  ntamd  kokg'  anase  tuntum? 

ivill  you  buy  the  red  or  the  blue  cloth? 

Hem.  Not  to  be  confounded  with  this  juxtapo.sition  of  two  adjectives 

is  the  case  wlien  an  adjective  has  an  adverb  after  it  (as  an  adjunct);  as, 

dua  kokuro  pa,  a  very  large  tree\  nnipa  pi  pa,  a  great  many  people. 

2.  Sometimes  the  second  of  two  adjectives  is  expressed  by  an  adjective 

sentence;  e.  g. 

To  ntama  pa  a  eye  fe  (or :   ntama  fefe  h.  eye)  ma  me, 
buy  a  good  and  fine  (piece  of)  cloth  for  me. 

189«  1.  In  the  place  of  an  attributive  adjective,  we  may  also  have 
an  adjective  sentence  (besides  the  case  mentioned  in  §  188,  2).  See  §  257. 

2.  An  attributive  numeral  may  have  the  words  beye  (se)  or  (be)boro 
before  it,  denoting  approximate  estimation ;  e.  g.  nnipa  beye  se  du  = 
nnipa  a  wobeye  se  du,  about  ten  persons.  §  160,  4.  17 J,  2.  229,2.  258,6. 

3.  On  appositive  nouns  in  the  place  of  English  adjectives,  see  §  191. 

2.  The  Appositive  Noun. 
lOO,  1.  A  noun  in  ajjposition   is   put  after  the  noun  or  pronoiiu, 
to  which  it  is  referred,    and  stands  always  in  the  same  case  with  it. 

2.  Of  two  nouns  combined  by  apposition,  the  former  is,  generally, 
of  a  wider  sense  (a  generic  name),  and  the  appositive  noun  gives  a 
specific  name,  limiting  the  former  to  some  individual ;   as, 

Ohene  Dawid,  king  David;  me  wura  ghene,  my  lord  the  king] 
aboa  ananse,  the  animal  ^spider'. 

3.  Two  or  more  appositive  nouns  of  equal  value  may  be  joined  to 
one  noun,  one  after  the  other  (without  a  comma);  as, 

Osee  Kwaku  Dua  Fedu  Agyemah,  the  king  (ofAsante)  KwakuD.F.  A. 

4.  Appositive  nouns  of  different  value,  or  an  apposition  bearing  a 
wider  sense  than  the  noun  preceding  it,  or  an  apposition  to  a  personal 
pronoun,  may  be  separated  in  writiiag  by  a  comma;  as, 

I'srael  bene  Salomo,  Dawid  ba,  Solomon  the  son  of  David,  king  of  Isr. 
Yesu  Nasareni,  i'srael  bene,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  king  of  Israel. 
Wo,  Kofi,  na  woaye  ade  no!  thou,  Kofi,  hast  done  it! 
M6,  Akuapemfo,  moaka  akyiri !    you  Akuapem  people  stay  behind. 


108  SY^'TAX.  •         §  191-19:5. 

lOl.    Nouns  of  persons,   as  obarima,  obanih,  obca,  and  such 
as    are  fornicd  by   tlie  personal  suffix  fo  or  ni,   are  frequently  put  in 
apposition  to  otlier  nouns,   where  in  Engl,  adjectives  are  used;  e.g. 
AbofrA  gbarinia,  lit.  d  cliild  a  man,  a  male  child,  a  hoy;  abofra  gbea, 
a  gii'l;  akoa  sisii'6,  lit.  a  fdlow  a  deceiver,  a  deceitful  fellow. 
Such  nouns  often  form   compounds  with  the  nouns  to  which  they  are 
added  (which  is  seen  esjjecially   from   the  changed   tone,   the  principal 
noun  often  losing  its  own   high  tone) ;  e.  g. 

Obabarima,  obfibanin,  obabea,  onuabarima,  onuabea,  ohemmea;  §  41,  2. 
Obanimdcfo,  a  ciinniiuj  jjersoti]    anomaniferefo,   a  kecnsifihted  bird. 

3.  The  Attributive  Noun  and  Pronoun. 

192*  The  attributive  noun  or  pronoun,  or,  the  noun  or  pronoun 
in  the  possessive  case  (§  45,  3),  is  placed  immediately  before  the  word 
which  is  qualified  by  it,  in  close  connection,  by  which  not  the  attri- 
bute, but  the  word  qualified,  is  often  caused  to  exchange  its  indepen- 
dent form  with  its  connected  form  (§  47-49).  E.  g. 

Esono  were,  the  elephant's  shin;  onipa  honam,  man's  hody; 
tekrema  ano,  the  tip  of  the  tongue;  ofie  kwan,  the  way  home; 
eho  adah,  the  houses  there;  obi  akura,  another  man's  village; 
yen'  kurow,  our  town;  ehena  sekah'  ni?  whose  knife  is  this? 

193.  The  attributive  noun  (or  pronoun),  in  its  relation,  to  the 
noun  qualified  by  it,  denotes 

1.  the  possessor  of  that  other  thing,  or  a.  personal  or  social  connection : 

yen  asase,  our  country;  ohene  aban,  the  kings  palace; 

me  nua  oba,  my  brother's  son;  akoa  no  wura,  that  slave's  master. 

2.  the  author  of  a  thing,  or  the  subject  of  an  action: 

ohene  mmstra,  the  king's  law;  amrado  nhoma,  the  governor's  letter ; 
bani'i  adwuma,  two  men's  work;  abofra  no  agoru,  the  child's pjlaying. 

3.  the  object  of  an  action: 

asase  no  ton  anye  no  de,  the  selling  of  the  land  displeased  him. 

4.  the   whole,  of  which   the  other  thing  forms  a  part  : 

gsekah  no  fw6ti,  the  point  of  the  knife;  nnua  ase,  roots  of  plants. 

5.  the  material  of  which  the  thing  is  made: 

dwete  atere,  a  silver  spoon;   kiintu  ntade,  woollen  clothes. 

6.  the  contents  of  a  thing: 

agyan  kotokii,  a  bag  for  arrows,  a  quiver;  nkyene  pae,  a  bag  of  salt. 

7.  the  pA.ace  where   a   thing  is,  from  which  it  comes,  to  which  it  tends : 

okwankyeh  dua,  a  tree  by  the  wayside;  eho  ade,  the  things  there; 
Abrokyiri  kente,  a  sort  of  country-cloth  from  Europe; 
osoro  kwah,  tJi£  way  to  heaven. 

8.  the  time  of  an  action ; 

anadwo  adwuma,  ivork  by  night;  awia  adidi,  a  meal  at  noon. 

9.  the  quality  ascribed  to  a  thing,  or  the  manner  of  some  action  : 
nokwcire  Nyahkopgh,  the  true  Crod;  nokware  ahonu,  true  repentance. 


§  194-196.  SIMPLE   SENTENCES.     ATTRIBUTES.  109 

10.  the  cause  or  origin,  tlio  purpose  or  end  and  aim  of  an  action: 
gdg  mmpflei'ibo,  lahour  of  love ;  sik4  adwunia,  (t  /cork  for  inohci/. 
Rem.  The  place  oi-  o/Acr  relation  is  freqnently  stated  by  a  noun  or 
pronoun  with  a  j)Ostposilion,  so  that  the  latter  is  th(^  direct  attribute 
to  the  noun  qualified,  and  has  the  noun,  to  wliicli  it  helouj^s,  ns  an 
attribute  before  it;   e.  g. 

gpon  so  ntama,  the  doth  upon,  the  table:, 
okwan  mu  asem,  a   word  (heard)  in  (ov  on)  tlie  /rai/; 
ne  niui  ho  nkgmmo,  tJie  anxiety  for  his  hr other. 
In  this  manner  all  the  nouns  of  place  and  relation  appcii-   in  llic  jjos- 
sessive  case,  when  the  English  prepositions  corresponding  ((»  llniii  show 
the  relation  of  one  noun  or  pronoun  to   another  noun;   e.  g. 
me  ho  asem,  a  matter  ahoid  (or  conrerniiaj)  me; 
gdiin  akyi  dua  no,  the  tree  behind  iJie  house. 

Ift^.  In  many  of  the  cases  stated  above,  the  attiibutive  combi- 
nation passes  over  into  real  compounds,  indicated  by  cbangcs  of  tinw. 
and   of  sounds,  especially   dropping  of  prefixes;  e.  g. 

anyamesem  =  Onyamc^".   asem,  tJie   nmrd  of  (rod;   see  also  §  ;')!,  :\. 

sikadwi'ima,   akwannnisem,   §  19;-J,  10.   Item. 

anadwoboa,  night-animal  {nocturnal  bird  &c.)  ;  cf.  §  I'Jl],  S. 

193*    Double  expression  of  the  attribute  is  met  with  in  some  cases: 

1,  When  the   attributive  noun  is  the  name    of  a    person,    (^specially   a 
proper  noun,  the  pronoun  ne  may   be  added  to  it;  e.g. 

Noa  n'agya  ne  hena?   icho  UH(S  Noah's  father? 

Yosef  ne  niianom  bae,  r/o.S'eph's  brethren  came. 

Rem.  The  Mfantsi  Grammar  (])ag.  10.  89.)  makes  it  a  rule  that  the 
possessive  case  "is  distinguished  by  a  personal  pronoun  in  the  posses- 
sive case  annexed  to  the  noun",  e.  g.  anoma  ne  ntekere,  bird  its  fea- 
thers ;  nnoma  wgre  ntekere,  birds  their  feathers.  This  seems  to  be  a 
singularity  of  that  Fante  dialect ;  in  other  dialects  it  would  sound  rather 
childish,  and  'anoma  ntakara,  nnoma  ntakara'  is  (|nite  sufficient, 

2.  When  the  emphatic  parlicles  ara,  ankAsa  are  added  to  the  attri- 
butive pronoun,  the  single  pronoun  is  repeated;  e.  g. 

meara  me  fi,  my  oivn  house;  nankasa  ne  mi,  his  own  mother. 

106.    1.  When  the  word,  to  which  an  attribute  is  referred,  has  been 
mentioned  before,  the  pronoun  de  or  dea  is  put  for  it.  §  <6'i.Mat.22,3l.  32. 
Asgw  yi  n'ye  wo  de,  na  eye  me  dea!  this  hoe  is  not  yours,  but  mine! 
But  even  this  may  be  omitted;     e.  g. 

Hena  ba  ne  no?  Dawid.     Whose  son  is  he?  David's.    Mat. 22,42. 
Rem.  The  emphatic  particle  de  (§  75,  3)  must  be  distinguished  from 
the  pronominal  de;  both  may  be  used  together;  e.g. 

Me  sekan   ye  nnam;  na  wo  de  de,  enye  nnam,  my  knife  is  sharp; 
but  as  for  yours,  that  is  not  sharp. 

2.  A  subordinate  sentence   may   stand   in  the   place   of  an   attributive 
iiouu;  see  §  255,  6. 


110  SYNTAX.  §197-199. 

4.  Different  Attributes  added  to  one  Noun. 

197.  Two  or  all  three  kinds  of  attrihiUe  {§  184)  may  be  used  at 
the  same  time  for  only  one  noun,  be  it  a  subject ')  or  object  -)  or 
other  eomplement  or  adjunct  of  a  verb,  or  be  it  an  attributive  noun  ^)- 

13  3  4  [)  C.  7  H  '.1  111 

1.  Me  nua  kuma  Kofi  Badu  adan  fof'oro  abien  no  ahyew, 

9  8  7  1,  \  J  1  «  6  in 

those  two  new  houses  of  mi/  i/ounffest  hrother  K.  B.  are  burned. 
The  subject  adan  (^)  has  three  different  adjectival  attributes  (^, ^'') 
after  it,  and  before  it  an  attributive  noun  (-'),  which  again  has  an 
attributive  pronoun  (')  before  it,  and  an  attributive  adjective  (•*)  and 
two  apjjositive  nouns  (proper   names)   after  it. 

2.  When  we  say,  Woahyew  me  nu4...  adan  ..no,  t]iei/  have  burned 
those  ..houses  of  my  ..  brother  ..,  then  we  have  the  subject  of  the 
former  sentence  (adan)  as  an  ot)}ei:f,  being  a  complement  of  the 
verb   (ahyew),   to   which   a  new   subject  (wo-)   is  prefixed. 

3.  When  we  say,  Me  nua  . .  .  adan  .  .  .  no  hyew  (a  ehyewe  no)  y6 
me  yaw  se,  tlie  bnrniini  of  those  ..  houses  of  my  ..brother  ..  grieves 
me  mwh,-  then  we  have  the  word  adan  as  an  attribiite  to  the 
new  subject  hyew. 

In  these  three  sentences  the  different  attributes  are  always  the  same. 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Completion  of  the  Predicate. 

198*  The  predicate  is  completed,  when  the  verb  alone  does  not 
suffice  to  express  a  complete  thought. 

'J'he  different  kinds  of  complements  of  the  verb  are: 
\.  nominative  complemeids  (of  identity,  character,  quality,  number); 

2.  objective  complements,  or  objects,  one  or  two  for  a  \erb; 

3.  locative  comj)lemcnts,  or  con/jdements  of  place ; 

4.  adverbial  compdements  of  manner; 

5.  specific  complements  of  verbal  phrases  (equal  to  any  of  those  mentio- 
ned   under   1 ,  2,  3  or  4). 

All  these  are  integrant  or  necessary  parts  of  the  predicate. 

1.  The  Nominative  Complement. 

199.  Certain  verbs  of  existence  {§  102,  1)  reqxure  nominative  com- 
plements,  consisting  of  a  noun  or  pronoun,  adjective  or  numei-al. 
1.  Identity  of  existence  is  expressed  by  the  verb  ne  (old:  de),  and  a 
noun  or  a  pronoun.  The  subject  and  the  complemental  noun  signi- 
fying the  same  person  or  thing,  the  position  of  both  can  be  inter- 
changed without  materially  altering  the  sense.  E.  g. 

M«'^  nu/i  ne  K«>fi  (Kofi  ne  me  nua)  my  brother  is  Kofi  (K.  is  my  br.). 


§    199.  SIMPLE   SENTENCES.     COMPLEMENTS.  Ill 

Ohidni  asomm^n  ne  batafose,  a  poor  man's  ivory  is  a  hog's  tooth 

Bone  akatua  ne  wu,  the  wages  of  sin  is  death. 

Yeliowa  ne,  Nyankopoh,  the  Lord,  he  is  the  God.  1  Kings  18-,  SO. 

Okese  no  ne  wo,  the  great  one  art  thou  =  thou  art  the  greatest. 

N^hyiva  ne  mo,  blessing  i.  e.  alt  blessed  are  you. 
J^ew.  When  the  pronouns  yi  or  no   are  made  the  complement  of  ne, 
they  are  contracted  witli  the  verb  into  ni,  nen  (Ak.  di,  de  no,  do  no). 
E.g.  Me  na  ni  =  me  na  ne  oyi  (oyi  ne  me  nji),  this  is  my  mother; 

m'agy^  nen  =  m'agya  ne  no  (one)  m'dgya,  he  is  my  father; 

gwo  ni !  this  or  here  is  a  serpent,  also:  this  (picture)  represents  a.s. 

Mini!  here  I  aw;  wuni!  Itcre  thou  art:  6ni  (eni)o !  here  lie  (it)  is; 

yen  ni !  here  ive  are;  muni!  here  yon,  are;  won  ni!  here  they  are! 

Onen,  it  is  he;  gnoara  nen,  he  is  the  very  same  person. 

2.  Existence  in  a  distinct  individnalily,  or  in  appurtenance  to  a  certain 
class  of  things,  is  indicated  by  the  verb  ye  in  the  coutinuative  form, 
=  to  be,  and  a  complemental  noun  or  ])rononn.  E.  g. 

Eye  hena?   ivho  is  it':*  eye  onipa  ben?   ivhat  (or  ichi'-h.)  man  is  ilY 
eye  me,  Kofi,  it  is  1,  K.;  eye   won   na  eyee,  it  is  they  ivJio  dit  it. 
Eye  ghene,  it  is  the  king;    eye  oh^ne  bi,  it  is  a  certain  Icing; 
oye  ghene,  he  is  a  king;  one  bene  (no),  he  is  the  (that)  king; 
gdi  bene,  he  is  (rides  a.s-)  king. 

Eye  den"  na  gton  ?  what  is  it  that  he  sdls?  eye  nkokg,  it  is  fowls. 
Enye  biribi,  it  is  {also:  it  make.s)  iiothing;  eye  aseiikese,  it  is  an 
important  matter.  Eye  sikd,  enye  a\V6\va,  it  is  gold,  not  brass. 
Patu  ye  anoma,  the  Oni  is  a  bird  (is  of  the  class  of  beings  called  b.). 
Anomsi  yi  ye  patu,  this  bird  is  an  oni  (of  a  class  of  birds  called  o.). 
Oni])a  no  ye  gtor<')i'o,  that  man  is  a  liar.    Eye  me  dea,   //  is  mine. 

3.  Existence  in  a  certain,  (jiudily,  state  or  condition,  is  indicatc^d  by 
the  verb  ye,  to  be,  and  a  complemental  adjective.    E.g. 

Nkokg  bi  ye  fufu,  ebi  ye  tunti'im,  sofue  fowls  are  u^hile,  others  black. 
Sumpi'  ye  duru,  led  is  heavy;  asawa  ye  hare,  cotton  is  light. 
Okwaii  yi  ye  tetere,   gsa  no  ye  hihia', 
this  way  is  broad,  that  path  is  narrow. 
Hern.   Quality,  espec.  colour  and  dimension,  and  state  or  condition, 
are  frequently  expressed  by  verbs.  §  85,  3.  102,  4. 

4.  Existence  in  a  certain  number  is  indicated  by  the  verbs  ye,  si, 
gn,  nam,  boro  (in  the  continuative  form)  and  a  numeral  (or  ad- 
jective of  quantity). 

As6  ye  abieiV,  ano  ye  biako  pe,  the  ears  are  two,  the  mouth  is 
only  one.  Dawid  nuanom  si  alie?  wosi  asoh,  David's  brothers 
ivere  how  many?  seven.  Ntrama  abe  na  egu  hg?  esi  atiri  di'i, 
how  many  cowries  are  lying  there?  there  are  ten,  heads.  Ode 
ahorow  gu  ahe?  eboro  aduonu,  there  are  how  many  kinds  of  yam? 
more  than  twenty.  Yenam  basia,  we  are  six  of  us. 
Indefinite  number  is  better  expressed  by  verbs,  than  by  adjectives; 
e.  g.  Wosua  (wyye  kaknibi),  they  are  few;  wgnngso,  they  are  not  many; 
wodgso  (wosi  bebre),  tJiey  are  tnany;  edgso,  it  is  enough. 


112  SYNTAX.  §  200. 

The  verbs  ye,  si,  boro,  are  also  used  in  the  future  tense;  cf.  §  175,2. 
Wobeye  (se)  du,   they  will  he  (ahonl)  ten. 
AVobesi  hu,    they  ivill  amoioit  to  hnitdred. 

Ode  ahorow  no,   ebeboru  aduasa,  the  diffcrt'iil  Uiiuh  of  jiant  ituui 
he  more  than  thirty.    Ennii  sa,  they  ure  not  so  nuiny. 

5.  Difference  of  existence  is  indicated  by  tlie  verbs  so  no,  t'anini 
(usually  with  the  impersonal  prefix  e),  and  a  noim  or  pronoun 
(after  the  verb),  which,  however,  is  rather  to  be  called  the  .^^uhject 
than  a  complement.    (Jf.  §  157,  2.  E.g. 

Esono  asem  yi  ran,  na  esono  eyi  mu,  iJir  contents  of  these  two 
stories  are  different.    lMos.40,r).  EzeU.  ;^;J,  26.   Acts  15,  9. 

Aniwu  ne  wu,  nil  efanim  wu,  of  sftame  and  deatJi,  the  latter  is 
prefer ahle.    (Prov.)  Ct'§24s,  5.  102,5.  Mat.  11,  00,04^ 

6.  Churuje  of  e.mstence  is  indicated  by  the  verbs  ye  (in  all  its  forms 
except  the  continuative),  to  he.i-onu;  (jrow;  dan,  to  tarn,  hecome: 
nyin,  bo,  to  (jroiv.  The  new  kind  of  existenct^  is  expressed  by  a 
noun  or  adjective.   E.  g. 

Waye  ohene,  he  has  heronie  himj;  waye  kese,  he  has  hecome  stout. 
Dua  hyew  a,  edaiV  gyabi'riw  ne  nso,  when  wood  hums,  it  is  turned 
into  coal  and  ashes.  Edai'i  won'  jiman  abieiV  no  ko,  it  turned  out 
into  a  war  hetween  those  two  nations.  Omamfrsmi  nnyin  kron- 
kron,  (I  forei(jn  settler  does  not  heronie  pt(re  i.  e.  a  perfect  native. 
Wiinyin  or  w«ibu  akwakora  (aberewa),  lie  (slie)  has  (irown  an 
old  man  (woman). 

2.  The  Ohjective  Complement,  or  Ohject. 

SOO.    1.  Transitive  verhs  require  complements  in  the  objective  case, 

briefly  called  ohjecls.    The  object  is 

a.  the  thin(i  (or  person)  that  suffers  the  action,  or  is  affected  or  other- 
ivise  concerned  hy  it,  —  the  passive  ohject.  §  201-203.  204, 1-3.  Or  it  is 

h.  the  thing  produced  by  the  action,  —  the  resuUive  ohject.   §  204,  4. 

c.  Or  it  is  the  person  (or  thing)  interested  or  concerned  in  the  action 
to  whose  benefit  or  detriment  something  is  done,  to  whom  something 
is  given,  or  from  whom  something  is  taken;  we  call  it  the  terminative 
or  (as  it  stands  after  many  verbs  that  imply  giving)  the  dative  ohject. 
Cf.  §  45,  4.  46,  4. 

2.  Some  transitive  verbs  take  two  ohjects: 

a.  a  passive  and  a  resuliive  (or  factitive)  object,  §  205. 
h.  a  dative  and  a  passive  object,  §  206. 

In  both  cases  we  call  the  passive  object  the  direct,  and  the  other 
the  indirect  object. 

3.  A  few  intransitive  verhs  also  may  occasionally  have  an  object 
joined  to  them,  concernimf  whicli  the  action  takes  place,  or  which  gives 
occasion  to  it  or  calls  it  forth;   we  call  it  the  ohject  of  cOUCem.  It  is 


§  201.  SIMPLE   SENTENCES.    COMPLEMENTS.  113 

not  a  Tiecessaiy,  but  an  accpssory  oomplpnient  (hecanso  the  verb  ji;ivos 
a  fompleto  sense  without  it),  and  is,  therefore,  ecjual  to  an  adjuurl 
of  rause  (§  240,  la.  />.);  e.  g-. 

(Vsfi  ne  nua,  lie  heifdifs  h/s  hrolher;  =  osu  n«'  nua  hn,  Jn;  treeps: 
(ihonl  (or  o/A  ai'fonnl  of)  his  hrotlier^  ^^  osu  ma  ne  nua,  lie  trecjis 
for  his  hrolher. 
Oserevv"  ne  ba,  lie  derides  {liuailis  at)  his  r},ild:  —-  osen'-w'  iic  Ii.-'l  ho, 
he  lauffhs  uhout  (i.  e.  <il)  his  iJ/Hd,  =  ne  lj;i  iiti  nseri'w,  lie  liimjlis 
ott  account  of  his  child. 

4.  Inlransilire  and  tran.ntive  rerhs  oecasidiially  luwc  their  iiifniilire 
form,  simple  (without  or  with  an  attribute)  or  comj)ound,  joined  to 
them  like  on  ohjert,  wliiih  serves  either  to  give  enfphnsis  to  tlie  verli  <'>, 
or  to  express  the  nnnnier  ((/uaiiti/  or  decree)  of  tin-  .Ktiuii  '■).  or  to 
form  rerhal  phroses  conveying"  a  new  notion  'J. 

II.  Nna  na  wada,  na  wahwu,  he  sleeps  a  real  sleep,  hut  lie  is  uul  dtud. 
h.  Waila  owu  una,  he  sleeps  the  sleep  of  death. 

Wada  nnaho,  he  sleeps  a  deep  sleep. 

O'ko  likoden,  he  fifjhts  a  hard  fi<)ht'. 

Obo  ara  na  obo  me,   with  continued  strikinff  he  strikes  we. 
f.  (J'bo  mmgden,  he  exerts  himself.    Obo  mmof/jro.  he  heifiiis  afresh. 

5.  Loratire  roinplenients,  specific  complements  of  verbal  jili rases  and 
^  arious  adjuncts  may  be  found  comhined  Kitli  ohje'-ts.    (."f.  i<  2A6. 

On  the   Form  and  Position  of  the  Object. 

SOI.  1.  The  ohjert  is  expressed  by  a  noun,  j)roiniiiii  m-  ,iiiy  i.tln'r 
word  or  combination  of  words  equivalent  to  a  noun,  it  mav  be  siuijile 
or  compound  like  the  subject.  (§  1.56.  l(jl.  Co-ordinate  objects,  see 
§  24.5,  3.    Sentences  in  tlie  place   of  objects,  see  §  255,  .3.) 

"When  \'erbs  take  tiro  ohje'-ts.  each  of  theui  may  be  simjile  or 
com])ound. 

2.  When  the  ohjed  has  a  postposition  after  it,  we  may  in  some 
cases  call  it  a  (<ompoundj  ohject  of  ronrern  Tcf.  §  2<X),  o);  e.g. 

O'dwen  ne  nti  ho,  he  thinks  of  his  mother  (d  \Ven  is  transitive,  cf.  odwen 

asem;  this  word  asem  might  even  be  supplied,  whereby  the  words 

nena  ho  would  appear    as   the  compound  attribute  of  the  object). 

O'dwen  ne  dae  no  so,  he  meditates  on  his  dream. 

Cf.  Arts  10,19.  Luk.2,19.  and:    susuw  ho,  susuw  so,  Ads  12,  12. 

But  in  most  cases  we  take  the  postposition  either  as  a  loratire 
COmplemenl  relative  to,  and  defined  by,  the  noun  (or  pronoitn)  before 
it,  §  207, />.,  or  as  a  .sjiecific  complement  of  a  verbal  phrase,  §21. '5. 

?).  'i'he  position  of  tlie  ohject  is  usually  immediately  after  the  verb 
to  which  it  is  the  complement;  attributes  of  the  object  in  the  possessive 
case  must,  of  course,  intervene.  E.  g. 

O'bo  me,  he  strikes  me;  wabg  n'ani,  lie  has  kiarknl  mil  his  ri/e. 

Obgo  ahina,    ]ie  broke  a  pot;    gboy  ne  nua  ahlna, . . ///s  sisters  pot. 

8 


114  SYNTAX.  §  202.  203. 

i.  When  necossary,  the  object  assumes  the  connected  form,  §  47, 2c.  49. 

Fa  obo  no,  take  that  stone!  tow  bo  no,  throw  that  stone! 

Wiito  ode  (31,13),  lie  has  hought  yam. 

Wafiia  ode  (133,32),  he  has  planted  yam. 

5.  Tlie  object  may  be  put  by  itself  at  the  head  of  the  sentence,  by 
way  of  onphasis  or  from  other  reasons  (§  247),  and  is,  then,  in  its 
proper  phice  after  the  verb,  either  indicated  by  a  corresponding-  pro- 
noun  (no,  won),  or  understood.    E.g. 

Onipa,  won  no  no  nna  nhinci,  you  do  not  always  lore  (the  same)  man. 
Okyekyefo  ade,  nkura  na  edi,  a  miser  s  goods  the  mice  eat. 

Omission  of  the  Object. 
30S.  1.  An  indefinite  passir^e  ohject  of  transitive  verbs,   wliich  is 
omitted  in  English,  is  not  equally  omitted  in  Tshi,    but  indicated  by 
ade,  tJiinrf,  or  onipa,  man.  E.g. 

Osekan  twa  ade,  a  knife  cuts  (tilings). 
Okromfo  wia  ade,  a  thief  steals  {things). 
Owo  ka  onipa,  a  serpent  hites  (man). 

Ankji  meye  onifuraefo,    na    afei    mihu    ade,    whereas  I  was   hliitd, 
now  I  see.  Oseresere  ade,  he  hegs.    Juh.9,7.:i5.39.(41.) 

2.  In  other  cases  it  may  be  omitted  (though  in  English  it  be  indi- 
cated), when  it  can  be  guessed  from  the  nature  of  the  verb,  from  the 
context,  or  from  circumstances.  E.  g. 

Aniwa  nya  a,    na  fwene  anya,    //"  the   eye  gel.'^  (a  tJiinf/),    the  nose 

gets  {it  too).  Prov. 
Wo  nsa  dam'  a,   wonni  n  nyaw  wo,    if  your  Tiund   is  in  (the  dish), 

they  will  not  eat  (viz.  the  food  contained  in  it)  tearing  you  aside. 
Wonni  a,  wgnnoa,  if  they  do  not  eat  (a  thing),  they  do  not  cook  (it). 

Rem.  The  simple  verb   di,   to  eat,  is  always  transitive,  relative  to 
an  object,  but  the  redupliciition   didi  is  intransitive.  §99,2.  E.g. 
Wuntumi  iVko  ne  hkyeii;  odidi;  you  cannot  go  to  him,  he  is  at  meal. 

3.  AYhen  the  ohject  is  a  person  or  animal  that  has  been  mentioned 
just  before,  it  is,  as  in  pjuglish,   denoted    by  a  pro^ioun.  E.  g. 

Ogudn  no  atew,  kokyere  no,  the  sheep  has  hroken  loose,  go  calrh  it. 

4.  But  when  the  object  is  u)i  inanimate  thing,  the  pronoun  is  usu- 
ally omitted.  E.  g. 

Wode  nam  no  beye  den  ?  menoa  madi, 
what  will  you  do  with  that  meat?  I  will  rook  (it  and)  eat  (it). 

The   Object  an  Intinitive. 

^03.  1.  Sevei-al  verbs  may  take  an  infinitive  as  their  object;  e.g. 
sua,  to  learn;  kyere,  to  show,  teach;  hu,  nim,  to  know,  nnderstand; 
tumi,  to  he  aide,  can;  bde,  to  hegin;  kye,  to  delay;  gyae,  to  leaiu'.  off; 
wie,  to  finish,  complete. 


§  204.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     COMPLEMENTS.  115 

An  infinitive  of  a  transitive  (or  locative)  verb  has  its  object  or  ob- 
jects (or  locative  complement)  before  it,  like  an  attribute  in  the  pos- 
sessive case;  a  noun,  being  a  single  object,  and  the  infinitive  are  often 
niarle  up  into  one  compound  word.  E.  g. 

Osfia  gkenkan  nr  nhoma  kan  or  nhomakan,  lie  learns  to  read. 
Okyere  no  (nhnina'i  kyerew  or  nh(5makjere\v,  he  tea'/hes  him  to  ivrite. 
Obeliu  kei'ikaii  (niiomakai'i)  ntem,  he  will  soon  understand  to  read. 
Onim  ku,  lie  knows  (o  jUlhl ;  onim  ntrama  kan  (ntramakan),  he  can 
count  cowries;  minnim"  aduaiV  yi  di,  I  cannot  eat  this  (//.s//.  (having 
never  eaten  it  before).  Ehofo  tumi  ahoho  fwe,  the  people  there  are 
ahle  (are  so  hold  or  impudent  as)  to  flofi  stramfers.  Onnyae  sii,  he 
does  not  leave  off  weepinf) ;  wagyae  no  f\ve,  he  has  left  off  heatinrf 
him;  wannyae  no  yiye  ye,  he  has  not  left  doing  him  well.  Ruth.  2, 20. 
Wawie  n'asem  no  ka,  he  has  finished  {to  deliver)  his  speech.  Owiee 
n'asuafo  no  kasakyere,  he  made  an  end  of  commandinq  his  disjiples. 

Mat.  11, 1. 

2.  In  the  compound  frer|ucntatiYC  verbal  form  wanya  nyee  (§  107, 
22)  we  have  likewise  an  infinitive  as  the  object  of  the  verb  nya, 
and  such  an  infinitive  may  have  one  or  two  objects,  or  a  locative 
complement,  or  even  an  adjunct,  before  it,  like  an  attribute.  E.g. 

Wanya  ho  hkoe,  he  has  often  gone  there. 

Wiinyk  no  sa'  nkae,  he  has  often  told  it  so. 

Manyji  no  hkakyeree,  1  have  often  told  him. 

Man}a  no  fo  ntui,  I  have  often  admonished  him. 

Wonyjia  no  mpokyero  hiiui,   he  had  been  often  hound  ivith  fetters. 

Mark.  5,  4. 

Ren/.  The  verb  pe,  to  seek,  desire,  like,  love,  he  fond  of,  wish  for, 
and  the  verb  tumi,  to  he  a  match  for,  he  equal  to,  are  construed 
with   a  passive  object,   which  may  also  be  an  infinitive.    E.  g. 

Kope  apafo  bi  bera,  go  seek  some  (hiredj  lahourers  (or  carriers) 
and  come  with  them.   "Wope  oko,  they  are  fond  of  war. 

Ope  agoru  sen  adwumaye,  he  likes  pka/ing  hetter  than  icorking. 

Ope  n'asem,  he  likes  hint.    Ope  no,  he  loves  her. 

Mepe  ho  mmom'  sen  ha,  I  like  that  pilace  hetter  than  this. 

Metumi  no,  I  shall  he  aide  to  matcJi  or  to  overcome  him. 

Otumi  no.  he  /.s-  a  match'  for  him,  is  equal  to  him. 

Woantumi  won,  theij  could  not  withstand  or  overcome  them. 

Ontumi  adwi'ima  no,  he  is  unequal  to  this  business. 

Otumi  sa  yo,  he  often  does  so,  is  well  versed  in  doing  so,  is  accusto- 
med, knows  well  to  do  it  (sa  is  a  complement  of  manner  turned 
into  an  attribute  before  the  infinitive  yo=:yc). 

Otlier  constructions  of  pe,  to  wish,  he  willing,  uill,  tumi,  to  he  able, 
can,  see  i^  2.')G  Hem.  Of.  §  107,  12.  2.3. 

Passive  and  llesultive  Objects. 
t£0'l.   1.  (H  ])assive  ohjcrts,  examples  are  found  in  §  201,  3.  4.  202.1. 
203.    and    «dse\vlieiT'. 


116  SYNTAX.  §  205. 

2.  "VVo.  aild  somo  which  wo  may  c-all  rrr/procdl  ohjc'l^i  (liiis'  Outline 
i*v:c.  §  189,  1  a),  the  action  ex])re.s8e(l  in  the  verb  beinp:  conceived  as 
iintliKtl  between  the  subject  and  the  object,  so  that  we  may  transfer 
the  object  to  the  jiLace  of  the  subject,  and  the  subject  to  tliat  oi'  tlie 
object,  without  materially  altering:  tlie  sense ;  or  both  of  theni  may  be 
made  co-ordinate  subjects   or  united  into  one  proinnninal  subject.    K.  '^. 

Abofra  yi  se  n'agya,  litis  hoi/  is  like  his  falher; 

agya  no  se  ne  ba,  lliat  fdllirr  is  like  J/is  son; 

abofra  yi  ne  n'agya  se,  litis  ho//  (did  his  fitlher  are  alike; 

ayya  no  ne  ne  ba  se,  Ihid  falher  diid  his  son  (ire  (iliki\ 

gse  no,  o-ne  no  se,  wose  or  wosesee,  Ihei/  are  (dike. 

Ose  own,  or  owu  se  no,   he  deserves  deiilh  (or  dealh  heroines  him). 

Atade  yi  fata  no,  Ihis  (farinent  suils  him.  —  Asemnione.  fatji,  oliiani, 
« /;rK/ fiet'f/ //i.s  (is  likely  to  be  committed  by)  ft  })Oor  W(iii.    (T-'rov.) 

Mihyiaa  no  wg  kwah  mu,  1  met  him  on  fJie  rood :  i'>-ne,  nn''  h\  i.ie 
or  yehyiae  (wg)  ho,  he  met  ivilh  me  or  ice  met  O'ome  lotjelherj  Ihr.re. 

.'}.  Another  kind  oi  passive  ohject  is  found  with  predicates  expressinj^ 
a  hodilij  or  mentid  aff'erlioii,  and  takiui;-  a  /iroiioiiii-  as  an  (d)ject,  wliicb 
denotes  Ihe  person  ((ff'eded.  E.  g-. 

"Me  ti  ben  me,  mi/  head  aches.   Ne  se  tuti'iw  no,  hr  has  an  achiial  laolJi. 

^Fe  ho  dwiriw  me,  I  (cm  astonished,  shocked,  J  sji adder. 

Me  ho  yeraw  me,  /  am.  in  anvieti/  or  perplcxilji. 

A.  A  residtive  object  we  ha\-e   in  tbe  IVd lowing;'  sentences: 

Otomfo  bo  asow,  the  smith  forces  a  hoe  (- cf.  \\w  /xissivc  ol)ject  in: 
(Jtomfo  bg  dade,  tlie  smith  liammers  iron). 

(J'lnvene  tam,  he  weaves  cloth;   oseh   akohhua,  he  carres  a  cliair ; 

('ika  asem,  lie  delivers  a  speech;  osi  apini,  he  titters  a.  firoan: 

eye  ahuru,  it  produces  foam;  dua  sow  aba,  iJu:  tree  hears  frnil; 

asase  ba  aduan',  the  earth  produces  food. 

Direct  and  Indirect  Ohjects. 
A  passive   with  a  resultive  object. 

20»5.  1.  A  direct  or  passive  ohject  is,  by  the  nction  expressed  in 
some  verbs,  made  or  turned  into,  or  appointed  <»r  lonsident!  as,  or 
railed,  sometliinf)  else,  expressed  by  the  indirect  or  resultive  ohject, 
which  is,  in  this  case,  called  the  factitive  ohject.    E.  g-. 

Wgyee  no  safohene,  thei/  made  him  cuptuin; 

wosii  no  bene,  thei/  set  him  (up  as)  Icinp;  cf.  5. 

wghyee  no  sgfo,  thei/  appointeil  him  (to  be)  priest-. 

gbaylfo  daiV  neho  gsebg,  a  sorcerer  transforms  himself  into  a  lco/>ard. 

2.  After  the  verb  bu,  to  reckon,  esteem,  ronsider,  the  ])ai-ticle  se,  as, 
may  introduce  the  second  object;  e.g. 

Wobiiu  no  (se)  gpanyin,   the//  esteemed  him  (as)  an   elder; 

obuu  no  (se)  onyansafo,  he  roiinted  him  (tis)  a  wise  man. 

Unyai'ikopoii  a|»aw  mo  se  n'ad\\  nmayede,  Crod  has  choseii  i/OU  {as) 
his  instruments. 


206.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     COMPLEMENTS.  117 


.'!.  'I'lu!  /inlirri'l.  ohj('.:l  may  also  Ix*  an  iidjcchrc,  hrt'orc;  wliicli  ;i  iioiiu, 
|ir('\  ioiihly    inciilioiiL'd   or   icrci'i'cil    lo,   may    bu   iiiulcrstoud ;   c.  ^■. 

()lu'iu  no  krsv  ~^  ouijta  kesr,  ]>,c  f.slceiiicd  li/iii  (jrcdl       a,  (jrcal  man:, 
ohyir;ui  lioinrda   no,  na  oyc'-r  no   kivinkron  =;  da   kr(')iikroi'i, 

he  Massed  l/if  da//  of  rest  and  made  it  hol/j  ::^  a  Itu/ij  da;/\ 
tjliygc  ntama  no  knko',  lie  difcd  the  cloth  red; 
obijo  dado  no  ttTc,  he  hammered  the  iron,  flati 
wi'iyij.  li()  pahia.  //r  /afs  in((de  l/iere  desofale,  lai'l  (he  pl<a:e  ivasle\ 
wj'iyr  won   pjisa,   lie  has   idler///  deslroijed  them. 

1.  Tli(^  verbs  cxprcs.siii!;-  to  rail,  to  (fire  a,  na)iaj  to,  have  u.siially 
In'a  vine  'Is ;  e.  -j;. 

WnWi''  no  Jvni'i,  the//  call  him  K.',   wotou  no  A'dow,  tJieij  named  him  A. 

Ill  'wiilVv  no  dill  s(''  Koli'  we  liave  two  verbs,  eaeh  with  a  single  object; 
111   'wuti'iuno  din   Aib'pw,    llifi/   (jarc   him   the    name  A.\    we   have  two 
objects-like  those   in   i?-I2,   and   Adow  is   au  apposition  to  din; 
in  'wotoo  ue  dill  Adow',    wc   lia\e   one  object,   din,   with  an  attributive 
jjroiioun  and  an  apposition. 

5.  Jn  some  of  the  above  mentioned  cases,  the  passi\'e  object  may 
also  have  its  own  ^■erb  de  (or  t"a  in  the  inijK'rative  and  negative  forms), 
so  that  we  luiAe  two  co-ordinate  jiredicatcs,  each  with  its  complement. 
Cf.  §  245,  2(f. 

Wode  no  yee   osafohene;    wode  no   sii  heue  ;    wode  ni*   hyee  osofo. 

Wode  no  too  Adow;   another  construction   would   be: 

Wode  ne  wot'a  A'dow  din  too  no,  thei)  iiaiiajd  him  after  his  iin^r/e  A. 

lie)!}.  We  might  call  an  indirect  ohject  ov  n  eonqilemeid  of  com/iarison 
a.  the  ol)je':t  icilh   tvhi<:h   a   direct  object,  introduced   by  the,  verb   de  or 

i"a,   is  compared;   e.g.   Obi  nVta  aberekyi  nto   guauteh   ho,   HObod/j 

rom/nires  a  fioat  with  a  ahecp.  Cf.  §  253'\  C. 
h.  what  we  shall  iind  mentioned  in  §  2o5  c.   as  an    adjunct    of  extent 

or  concern. 

A  dative  with  a  passive  object. 

S06.  1.  The  datire  o/>jert  stands  after  verbs  exjiressing  that  smnc- 
thiiig  is  iiiren  or  im/mrted  to  or  bestowed  on  the  object  (the  subject 
being  the  giver  and  the  object  the  recei\er),  or,  that  something  is  taken 
or  elicited  from  the  object  (so  that  the  object  is  the  giver).  Such  verbs  are: 

ma,  to  (lire;  kye,  lojiresent;  kyere,  to  shoa\  teacJi;  here,  tobrimj; 

ye.   to  do  (good  or  harm),  to  cau.se;  gyaw,  to  leare  to    .yi,   to  hand 

out,   (jive  out  to,  and:  to  rail  forth,  from ;  g'ye,  to  take  from;  bis  a, 

to  ask  from;  bua,  to  answer. 

'JMie  thing  given,  the  pasaive  or  direct  object,  follows  after  the  dative 
or  indirect  object.  E.  g. 

Omaa  rae  sekan,  he  (jave  me  a  knife:, 

okyee  me  duku,  lie  presented  me  with  a  handkerchief ; 

okyeree  me  mfonini,  lie  showed  me  a  picture.  Cf.  2. 

Wadi  ue  uhiua,  waunyaw  me  hi,  he  has  eaten  all  and  left  me  nothin(j. 


118  SYNTAX.  §207.208. 

Mayc  wo  bone,  I  have  done  ihee  uronp,  evil. 

wayy  mc  yiye,  lie  has  done  me  rjood,  shoivn  me  kindness. 

Eyemc  anigye,  it  gives  me  joy;  cf.  eye  me  fe,   il  mahes  mc  glad; 

rye  me  ydw,  awerebow,  it  gives  (causes)  me  pain,  grief. 

O'yi  me  abiifiiw,  he  2>>'Ovokcs  me  to  (calls  forth  from  me)  anger; 

oyl  mc  axVerchuw  da,  he  always  causes  me  grief; 

6yi  mc  nt(in,  he  prefers  a  charge  against  me,  expostidales  ivith  me. 

Woyi  olicne  tow,  tliey  pay  tribute  or  taxes  to  the  king; 

oheue  yi  wou  tow,  the  king  raises  tribute,  taxes,  from  tliem. 

Woagye  me  sika  pt  tliey  have  taken  much  money  from  me. 

Okaa  me  asem  bi,  he  told  me  something;  obisaa  me  ascm  bi, 
he  asked  me  something;  mammuano  f\Vc,  I  answered  him  nothing. 

2.  In  some  of  the  above-mentioned  cases,  tlic  passive  object  may  also 
have  its  own  (auxiliary)  verb  dc  (or  fa,  §  108),  and  then  precedes 
the  principal  verb  with  its  dative  object,  so  that  we  have  two  co- 
ordinate predicates,  as  in  §  205,  5. 

Ode  sekan  no  maa  me ;  ode  dfiku'  yi  kyee  me ;  ode  mfoni'ni  bi  kyerrij  me. 

Ode  ne  ba  beree  me,  he  brought  me  his  child. 

Mede  as«]m  no  mibisaa  no,  1  asked  him  about  that  matter; 

ode  nsera  yi  buaa  me,  he  answered  me  with  these  words. 

In  other  cases  the  indirect  object  is  introduced  by  a  directive  verb 
as  an  auxiliary,  following  after  the  principal  verb  and  its  passive 
object,  —  so  that  we  again  have  two  co-ordinate  predicates,  of  which 
we  call  the  second  an  auxiliary.    Cf.  §  243  b. 

Okaa  asem  bi  kyeree  me,  he  told  me  something. 

OgyAw'  ne  sika  maa  me  ==  ogyaw'  me  ne  s.,  he  left  me  his  money. 

Other  [co-ordinate]  auxiliary  verbs  may  be  used  besides;  e.g. 

Wakyerew  nhoma  de  aberc  me  =  wakyerew  me  hhoma,  he  has  tvritten 
me  a  letter.  Me  nso  mekyerew'  bi  (ma  wode)  kcjmfia  no  =  me- 
kyerew'  no  bi,  I  cdso  ivrote  one  to  him. 

D.  The  Locative  Complement,  or  Complement  of  Place. 

207.  Locative  verbs,  i.  e.  verbs  implying  rest  or  motion  in,  or 
direction  to  or  from  a  place,  require  a  complement  of  place. 

The  place  forming  the  complement  is  indicated 

a.  in  an  ahsolute  way,  without  express  reference  to  another  object, 
by  a  noun  ov  pronoun  or  adverb  of  place;  §  118,2.  119.  122.  123,2. 
121-128. 

b.  as  referring  to  some  other  thing  (or  person),  by  a  noun  or  pronoun 

with  a  postposition;  §  118,  3. 119.  122. 123,  1. 124. 125. 

E.  g.  a.  Owo  fio,  he  is  at  home',  gte  ho,  he  sits  or  lives  there. 

b.  Owg  ddu  mu,  he  is  in  the  house;  ote  ne  ba  ho,  slie  sits  by  her  child. 

208.  Such  locative  verbs  are  the  following: 
1.  Verbs  denoting  rest  in  or  at  a  place: 

wo,  neg.  nni,  to  be;  te,  to  sit,  be,  dwell,  live  (at  a  place); 


§  208.  SIMPLE    SENTKNCES.     COMPLEMENTS.  119 

ka,  lo  revnuin,  he  left  (at  a  place);  di,  to  occupy  (a  place); 

tra,  tcruT,  to  stay  (cf.  4);  kye,  to  stay  long. 

Sika  bi  wo  mo  foto  mu,  there  is  some  gold  in  my  bag. 

Oiini  d;ln  mu  na  onni  turom,  he  is  neither  in  the  house  nor  in  the 

Ote  u'agua  so,  he  is  sitling  on  his  chair.  {garden. 

Akyi'm  lu'tie  to  Kyebi,  the  king  of  Akem  resides  at  Kycbi. 

Wj'ika  babi,  he  has  remained  soyncwhere  i.  e.  he  is  dead. 

Obetrii  ha  nnanuu,  he  will  stay  here  two  days. 

Orciikyc  ha  bio,  he  will  no  more  stay  long  here. 

Obedi  ho  nuansa,  he  will  pass  there  three  days.    [In  this  sentoncc, 

ho  may  be  taken  as  an  adjunct  of  place  (§  225,  3),   but  in  odi  ho, 

he  is  the  second  (§  8o,  2),  it  is  a  complement.] 

2.  Verbs  denoting  jnotion  in  a  place: 

nam,  to  tvalk,  kyin,  kyini,  to  move  round,  run  about,  rove,  roam; 
fa,  to  take  one's  way  (through,  Oiier,  along). 
Onam  (or  gncnnam)  abontoh  so,  he  is  walking  on  the  street. 
Obommofo  kyini  wuram',  tJie  hunter  roves  through,  the  bush. 
Wafa  mfikyiri,  he  has  taken  his  ivay  behind  the  house. 

3.  Verbs  denoting  rest  in  a  place  in  the  continuatire  form,  and 
motion  to  a  place  in  all  the  renuiining  forms,  used  either  intransitively, 
v)r  causatively  after  the  auxiliary  verb  de  (or  fa): 

gyina,  si,  ta,  to  stand,  to  place;  tweri,  to  lean  against; 
da,  to,  gu,  bew,  boa,  boa,  sara,  butuw,  to  lie,  to  lay,  cast  &c. 
sisi,  to  sit,  perch;  kotow,  to  stoop,  kneel;  sen,  to  hang,  to  squat; 
konkon,  to  hang,  soar;  tene,  to  creep,  lie  lengthway ; 
boii,  ben  kye,  pini,  Ak.  pinkyc,  to  a})proach,  be  near,  draw,  near. 
Ogyina  ho,  he  is  or  was  standing  there;  okogyinaa  ho,  he  went  and 
stood  there;  gyina  ho!  stop!  ode  no  gyinaa  ho,  he  placed  him  there. 
Una  bi  si  ne  ddu  anim\  a  tree  stands  before  his  house. 
Oresi  bonto  no  mil,  he  is  stepping  into  the  boat. 
Nsu  ta  mfikyiri,  ivater  stands  behind  the  house. 
Oyare  da  mpa  so,  he  lies  sick  on  his  bed. 
Okodaa  dua  bi  ase,  he  lay  down  under  a  tree. 
Owo  boa  okwaiimu,  a  serpent  is  lying  in  the  way. 
Niuian  bi  boa  abgnten  s«\  some  sheep  are  lying  in  the  street. 
Akoko  butuw  u'aba  so,  the  hen  sits  hatching. 
Ode  ne  tuo  t\\  erii  dua,  he  leaned  his  gun  against  a  tree. 
Okotow  ne  nankroma  anim\  he  is  kneeling. 
Yoabeh  kurow  no  ho,  ive  are  now  near  the  toivn. 

4.  Verbs  denoting  motion  to  a  place,  either  intransitive,  or  causative 
with  d  e  (or  fa) : 

ba,  to  come;  ko,  to  go;  du,  to  arrive;  duru,  to  descend,  comedown; 
so,  lo  reach;  ka,  to  touch  at;  pem,  to  knock  at;  tra,  to  sit;  f we, 
to,  to  fall;  fwe,  to  look;  kyere,  to  show,  turn,  direct  to  or  to- 
ivards;  kyene,  to  throw,  hurl  towards;  tvVa,  to  cut  across,  pass ; 
tra,  to  leap,  jump,  pass  over;  mi  a,  to  press  upon;  huw,  fila,  to 
blow  upon,  at,  into;  fiti,  to  bore,  prick;  hyeh,  to  enter. 


120  SYNTAX.  §  209. 

M'Adamf'o  hi  aba  me  rikyeti,  ((  friend  of  mine  has  come  to  me. 

Manyji  madu  fie  ni !  )io(v  at  IcnijtV  1  have  arrii'cd  at  home! 

Tra  ase!  sit  doirn !  Otr;ia  opni'ik*}  no  so,  Jie  sat  upon  the  horse. 

Wato  (or  waf\Ve)  amoani',  he  has  fatten  into  a  jnt. 

Xe  mtV'ii.sere  kyeie  apuci,  his  a'indotv  shotvs  eastward. 

Woti'iw'  Ynna  kyenee  pom',  lhe>j  ''ast  Jonah  forth  into  the  sea. 

Ohuiiiw  traa  oka  no,  he  leaj>ed  urer  the  dibh. 

Adesoa  no  uiia  me  ti  so,  the  load  pre-^sea  wij  head. 

O'liuw  ne  nsam",  he  bloivs  into  hi^-  hands. 

Otita  ogya  mil,  he  fans  the  fire. 

Ofitii  or  ohy^ii    dan   mu   ara  pe.  na  omaa  akye, 
as  soon  as  he  entered  the  room,  he  greeted. 

(Infinitives  appearing  like  locative  complements,  see  in  §  126.  280,2.) 

5.  Verbs  denoting  motion  from  a  place: 

fi  (firi),  to  proceed  or  eome  from;  gyaw,  to  teave. 

The  verb  fi  (firi)  in  the  contiuiiative  form  denotes  appurtenance 
to  a  place:  io  be  from\  in  other  forms,  especially  in  the  ingressive 
forms  (with  the  prefix  be  or  ko),  it  denotes,  as  the  verb  pue,  to 
appear,  come  forth,  make  one's  appearance  somewhere.   E.  g. 

Abofo  bi  fii  Kumase  bae,  messenfiers  came  front  Kumase. 
Osafohene  yi  fi  Akyem,  tliis  captain  is  from  Akem. 
Onipa  yi  abefi  me  mu,  this  man  has  come  to  me  unawares. 
Wafi  me  nsa  or  wafi  me  nsam  aguan,  he  has  escaped  p'oni  me. 
Wabefi  me  nscun ,  he  has  come  to  me,  I  have  fiot  him. 
Wapuc  abonteh  so,  he  has  .sltown  himself  in  the  street. 
()gya\v   ho  koe,  he  departed  from  thence.   Mat.l6,i.Joti.i,3.i3. 
[Cf.  Ogyaw"  no  ho  kge,  he  left  him  there  and  went  away. 
Here  gyaw  is  used  transitively  and  ho  is  an  adjunct  of  place.] 

4.  The  (adverbial)  Complement  of  Manner. 

309,  1.  A  mode  of  existence  is  expressed  by  the  verb  te  (§  208, 1)  and 
a  complement  of  manner,  consisting  in  a  pronoun  (den?  sa,  sa,  saara, 
se)  or  the  adverb  yiye,  well  [or  a  cotnparison  expressed  by  the  con- 
junction se  with  a  noun  or  pronoun  or  a  sentence,  cf.  §  255,  5].  E.g. 

Ote  den  ?  ne  ho  te  den  ?  how  is  lie?  otc  yiye,  ne  ho  te  yiye,  he  is  well. 
Oda  so  te  s;iara,  he  is  still  in  the  san/e  state. 
[Ote  se(nea  otc)  'nera.  he  is  as  (he  tvas)  yesterday.^ 
Ete  sa,  sa'  ua  ete,  [se  ete  ara  ne  no,  se  'te  neii,  se  'te  ni,]  so  it  is. 
Ote  se   ono  (te),  he  is  like  him,  similar  to  him. 
Onyame  asem  te  se  ogya,  the  word  of  God  is  like  as  a  (ire. 

Jer.  2d,  20. 

2.  The  verb  ye,  to  become,  making  up  for  the  verbal  forms  wanting 
in  the  verbs  t  e  (see  1)  and  y  e,  to  be  good,  assumes  the  same  comple- 
ments of  manner.    E.  g. 

A'ye  yiye,  it  is  well  now.    Ebeye  sa,  it  will  be  so. 
Wo  ho  beye  yiye  bio,  thou  ivilt  be  well  again. 


§  210-212.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     COMPLEMENTS.  121 

Be)H.    The  complement  of  manner  may  be  enlarged  by  an  adverb 
of  degree.  E.g.    Ote  yi'ye  pesc;  aye  yiy^  k«jra  ;  t^te  sa'  pe. 
The  examples  in   I.  2.  iiiiiy  also  t>e  taken  to  §  2o3.  2.'lt. 

3.  Other  cowplemcnls  of  matwcr,  showing  sim/hir/ti/,  insU'uwent, 
also  cause  or  uri(jin  of  an  action,  are  found  among  the  siiecific  coni- 
plemenls  of  rerbal  phraser;  §  211.  212.   E.  g. 

O'di  no  ny;"i,  he  treats  him  like  a  hoiufht  slave,  he  Hltreats  him. 

O'ka  no  mma',  he  touches  him  (irith)  sti''ks,  i.  e.  he  flo<fs  him. 

Wabow  ns;i,   he  ha.s  become    weak   from    slroiif)   drink,   i.  e.   he  is 
intoxicated. 

5.  {Specific  Comiilements  of  Verbal  Phrases. 

310.  A  rerb  expressing  the  notion  of  an  action  in  a  wide  and 
neneral  sense,  may  take  a  specific  complement,  so  that  both  words 
ioffctker  denote  one  new  idea,  which  in  the  English  and  other  languages 
is  usually  expressed  by  a  single  verb.  Such  peculiar  combinations 
we  call  verbal  phrases.  (By  other  Grammarians  they  are  called  com- 
pound verbs;  but  in  a  vernacular  grammar,  such  phrases  must  needs 
be  treated  as  syntactical  combinations,   not  as  mere  verbs.) 

Seven  different  kinds  are  to  be  enumerated  in  §211-220. 

311.  The  first  kind  of  verbal  jihrases  contains  «uch  in  which  the 
specific  compilenicnt  has  the  nature  either  of  an  object,  or  of  a  comple- 
ment of  niatiner.  Some  of  the  nouns  used  as  complements  are  scar- 
cely used  otherwise  but  in  connection  with  the  peculiar  verb  to  which 
they  belong;  the  real  meaning  of  them  is  often  obscure,  so  that  we 
cannot  easily  discern  between  the  objective  and  adverbial  complement. 
But  we  distinguisli 

1.  intransitive  combinations,  denoting  actions  or  states  contiued  to 
the  subjectj  some  of  them  become  transitive,  when  the  verb  is  used 
causatively ; 

2.  Iransitive  combinations,  taking  a  passive  or  dative  object  between 
the  verb  and  its  specific  complement. 

t2]!2.  (1.)  Intransitive  verbal  pit  rases  are  e.  g.  the  following: 
bo  dam,  to  (JO  mad;  trans,  (with  a  pass,  obj.):  to  drive  mad; 

wabo  dam,  he  is  mad;  ebebo  me  dam,  it  will  drive  me  mad. 
bo  gua  (cf.  agua,  seat,  egua,  market,  assembly),  to  assemble;  caus 

(often  with  a  dative  object)  to  ccdl  toyet/ier  an  assembly; 

wgabo  gua,  they  hold  a  council.   Brohene  no  bae  no,  ohene  boo  no 

gua,  when  the  governor  came,   the  king  convoked  an  assembly  in 

his  behalf. 
bg  tuo,  to  shoot  one's  self;  bow  nsa,  to  be  intoxicated; 
da  adagyaw,  to  be  naked;  da  nsow,  to  be  distinguished  by  a  mark; 
di  bata,  di  gua,  to  barter,  to  trade; 

odi  ntama  gua,  he  trades  in  cloth  (attribute  of  the  complement). 


^^'•^  SYNTAX.  ,  §213. 

di  bem,  to  he  (found)  innocent,  to  he  acquitted; 
di  fo,  to  he  (found)  (luiliy,  to  he  condemned; 

odi  kiini  fo,  Jie  is  (jiiilty  of  death,  condemned  to  he  killed-^ 
di  nira,  di  nkonim,  to  he  victorias,  to  triumph-^ 
di  pa,  to  go  01-  ivorlv  for  hire; 

oili  no  pa,  he  does  mcrcenanj  work  for  him; 
di  use  w,  to  curse,  swear;  di  oboHoni,  to  take  an  oath  (by  a  fetish); 
nom  abosom,  to  enter  into  a  confederacy; 
wo  abosom,  to  he  confederate; 

to  hko,  to  fall  asleep,  sink  into  a  shimher;  hudnGnkcrom,  to  snore; 
tu  agyina,  to  consult,  confer,  deliherate;  trans,  to  (jive  advice; 
twa  adwo,  agyadwo,  bo  bcna,  bo  abubuw,  to  lament. 

(2.)  Transitive  vcrhal  phrases  are  e.g.  tlie  following: 
bo  dua,  bye  nsew,  to  curse,  bo  fe,  to  wound  (in  the  head); 
bg  pa,  to  hire;  bo  koko,  to  forewarn;  bo  sobo,  to  hlamc; 
bu  bem,  to  acquit;  bu  fo,  to  condemn; 
di  kusum,  to  cheat;  di  amim,  to  over-reach; 
di  ni,  to  honour;  di  at  em,  to  scold,  revile;  di  awn,  to  ?nurder; 
gye  (abofra)  tata,  to  lead  [a  child)  in  walking; 
gye  atu,  ye  atn,  to  emhrace;  gye  a  wo,  to  welcome; 
hfi  mmobo,  to  see  with  commiseralion,  to  ])iiy,  commiserate; 
bye  ma,  to  fill;  liye  baninba,  hye  iikuraii,  to  encourage; 
k  a  h  y  e  w,  to  warm ;   k a  m  m  a,  f  w  e  m  p  i  r  c,  to  flog ; 
tu  fo,  to  admonish,  exhort,  give  an  advice; 
twa  adafi,  to  reveal,  discover,  disclose  to; 
twa  dwow,  to  roh:,  t\Va  twetia,  to  circumcise; 
yi  ad  w  o,  to  kidnap;  yi  bu,  to  frighten;  yi  ahi,  to  frighten;  to  mock  at. 
yi  apra,  to  warn;  yi  nton,  to  remonstrate  with,  to  reproach. 
Some    of  these    may    be   used    without  a  passive  object,    though  an 
indefinite  ohject  is  understood ;  e.  g. 

Wakobo  pa,  he  has  heen  out  to  hire  (people,  carriers,  lahourers) ; 
wabo  won  apa'  he  has  hired  them. 
Wadi  awu,  Ite  has  committed  a  murder  (on  somebody) ; 
wddi  no  awu,  he  has  murdered  him. 
Hem.  In  all  cases  in  which   both  the  verb  and  the  complement  are 
used  in  a  plain  sense   which  they  have  elsewhere,   we  do  not  speak  of 
specific  verbal  phrases;  as,  bo  kuw,  to  make  a  heap,  to  put  in  heaps. 

I313.  The  second  kind  of  verhal  phrases,  having  a  noun  of  place 
and  relation  for  their  specific  complement,  may  be  distinguished  from 
the  combinations  of  locative  verbs  with  common  locative  complements 
(§  207),  when  the  verb  acquires  a  new  meaning  in  connection  with 
the  specific  complement. 

E.g.  in  "oda  dua  no  ase,  he  lies  under  the  tree;  ofii  dua  no  ase 
bae,  he  came  forth  from  under  the  tree"'  the  verbs  da  and  fi  have 
locative  complements,  as  spoken  of  in  §207;  but  in  "oda  Onyam6 
ase,  he  thanks  God;  ofii  n'adwiima  ase,  he  hegan  his  work'"''  we  have 
the  specific  verhal  phrases :  "da  ase,  to  thank;  fi  ase,  to  hegin.'*  — 


§214.  SIMPLE   SENTENCES.     COMPLEMENTS.  123 

Other  examples,  referring  also  to  §  201,  2.  207&.,  are  the  following: 
O'fwe  mfonini,  he  heliolds  (loolis  at)  a  picture;  ofwe  nhuan,  he  tends 

sheep;  —  here  we  have  simjde  objects. 
O'tVve  ho,  he  looks  there;  ofwe  ne  wura  nsii  an^,  he  looks  unto  the 

hand  of  his  master; —  here  we  have  locative  complements. 
O'fwe  advvumayefo  so,  lie  superintends  the  lahoiirers; 

ofwe  asase  no  so,  he  (joverns  that  coimtri/;  —  here  we  take  f  w  o. .  so 

as   a   verbal  phrase  in  which  so  is  the  specific  complement,   and 

a d  w u m a y e f 0  or  asase  no  is  its  attribute. 

The  noun  of  place  and  relation  may  be  used  as  a  specific  comple- 
ment, either  absoluteli/,  as  a  mere  adverb  (of  place),  or  ivith  relation 
to  another  object,  as  a  ])OstposHion.     In  both  cases  the  verbal  ])hrases 
are  either  1.  intransitive  or  2.  transitive  [w'lih passiim  or  dative  oh'^acia) 
See  the  examples  in  §  214. 

314.  (Itt.)  Intransitive  verbal  phrases  with  an  absolute  locative 
complement  are  the  following: 

Ko  so,    to  (JO  on;    da  so,  toa  so,  to  continue  (see  §  107,  16); 

te  ase  (in  the  continuative),  tra  ase  (in  other  forms),  to  live. 

Hem.  1.  In  "wyto  n'ahenni  ase  dwuduo,  tltcJl  live  quicthj  wider  his 
reign"'  te  alone  is  sufficient,  because  a  common  postpositional  comple- 
ment follows. 

liem.^.  The  combinations  te  ase  and  tra  ase,  with  an  attributive 
noun,  mean  also:  to  sit  under,  and  tra,  ase,  without  an  attribute,  to 
sit  down;  e.  g. 

gte  dua  bi  ase,  lie  sits  (is  sittinij)  under  a  tree;  tra  ase!  sit  down! 

ba  mu,  bam',  to  covne  in,  i.e.  to  be  fulfilled,  realised; 

b«i  ran,  bom',  1.  lit.  to  strike  (emit  a  loud  sound)  in  or  tit  rough  (the 

space  in  which  we  live)  i.  e.  to  cry,  roar,  thunder;  2.  lit.  to  strike 

(togetlier)  in  (the  common  space),  i.  e.  to  unite,  agree,  be  reconciled, 

make  friends. 
tee  mu,   teem',   (lit.  to  stretch  in,   to   emit   a  sound  straightway 

penetrating  the  space  in  which  we  live,)  to  cry  out.  Of.  §120,  4. 
twa  mu,  twam',  (lit.  to  cut  in  or  through  the  space,)  to  pass  by. 

Jiem.  3.  In  bam',  bom',  bobom',  teem',  tecteem',  twam',  twi- 
twam',  the  specific  complement  mu  has  dropped  its  vowel  and  is 
written  together  with  its  verb  in  one  word;  yet  the  preterit  tense  may 
be  wi'itten  with  a  doubled  vowel;  as, 

Ne  dae  no  bdam'  pe,  his  dream  was  exactly  fulfilled. 

Woteeem' so:  fanoko!  they  cried:  take  him  away!  away  with  him ! 

Nnannii  no  twaam'  no,  ofii  ho  kge,  after  those  two  days  he  departed. 

Hem.  4.  Not  to  be  confounded  with  this  specific  locative  complement  is 

1.  the  postpositional  locative  complement  whose  attribute  is  omitted;  as, 
Ahind  bi  si  hg,  fa  nsii  gum'!  there  is  a  pot,  pour  tvater  into  (it)! 

2.  the  case  of  m  being  not  an  abbreviation  of  m  u,  but  belonging  to 
the  verb  by  original  formation,  as  in  bam,  fam,  to  embrace;  pam, 
to  join,  sew;  pam,  to  confederate;  pem,  to  knock  at;  som,  to  serve. 


124  SYNTAX.  §215. 

(1/).)    Iiilrdiis/l/'rc  rrrhiil  /ihi-ascs  with   a  vclxlivf  hjiatirf  ruivfilcwi'.ni 
i.e.  ;i  (M)!!)!!!!'!!!!'!)!  lo  wliicli  an  attrihntc  is  cxjircssiMl  or  uiKlcr.stctiul,  are: 
(li   Ml,  (t)  nil(\  iio'-cni ;  liyc  so,  /o  op/trcss; 
t'i   asc",    I'ili    asr,    live   asc,    lio   asc,   1  ii   asc,    lo   bcijiit. 
E.g.  Odi   iiKiri   no  so,  //,'■  niirs  orcr  [he  cdunlr//. 
01iy(j  I'ikurolVt  no  .so,   he  ()/i/)rcs.scs  (he  pcDjtle. 
Oil   as('    rcto   altan,  he  hefiiits  (o  build  a   hoiiHC. 
Otuu  aso  k;Ui  as('in  no,  he  related  Ihe  Morij  from  the  J>eijiuniiii}. 
lie))),  i).    In   llicse   jilirascs    a.sc    is  r.itlicr  a  name  of  a   lliiiig  (=  the 
under  end,    uiiderniost  jxirt,    fonndul/oH,    he(iiiini)i(j),  llian  a  name  of 
a  place.     (!f.  oliye   abanto   no  ase,  he  hefl/ns  that  hnildithj,   and:    oliye 
obu  no  ase,  //  stirks  under  that  .stone. 

gye  .s<'i,  to  replji  to,  to  (tnsnrer;  <''gy(!  iie  t're  so,  /(f  replies  to  his  call. 
so  mi'i,   lo  la;/  hiild  of:  so   jxin    no   nii'i,  /(///  hold  of  that  table! 
ka  ho,  (lit.  lo  loich   the  oatside)   to  aecoinpajii/  ;  nieka  no  ho,   J  a)t> 

with,  hini. 
These  phrases   may   take   a  dalire  obje  -I,   and  at  the  same  lim(!   the 
attribute   to   wliieh   the   complement  rel'ers,   may   be   b'ft  out;   e.  c 
0'c;ye  no  s('),  he  replies,  answers  hi)n  (=  <'>,ii'ye  uo  u'dsetn  so,  he  replies 

him  to  /lis  leord). 
So  U('»  mu  (=:  so  ne  mil,  so  oni'pa  no   mu),   laij  hold  of  him    (of  that 
man)!   But:    So  no  mu    (-^  so  uMdwuma  mu  ma  no),    lielp  him  in 
{his  work),  i.  e.  put  a  helpinq  hiuid  for  him  in  or  to  his  work. 
Meka  no  li6  (=  ne  ho,  §.').">  Jiem.  3),  I  shall  he  with  him.    But: 
Meka  no  ]i6  =  medc    (hi)    meka    (n'ade)    Iio    mama  no,    /  shall    add 

(sometli,in(i)  for  him  to  (what  he  has  <dreadi/). 
Ilcm.  0.   The   phrase  ka   \\o=^to  add,    is   causative,    and    the   iliiiig 
added    is    usually    introduced    by   de   (or  fa);   e.g.   ode   iniipa  ha  kfia 
dom  no  Lo,  he  added  a  hundred  men  to  the  host. 

(2.)  Transitive  verbal  phrases  with  specific  locative  eoinplcments  are: 
ma  so,  to  lift  up  (so  is  absolute,    without  reference  to  an  attribu- 
tive object).   Ma  wo  nan  so,  lift  up  tlteif  feet  i.e.  ijo  r/uick! 
tu  so,  to  depose,  dethrone.     Wotuu  no  ade  so,  thei/  dethroned  him. 
here  ase,  to  humble,  subdue   (with  passive  object;   ase  is  absolute); 
da  ase,  to  thank  (with  dative  object;  ase  is  absolute); 
hye  ase,  to  promise  (with   dative  object;    ase    is  relative,    usually 
followed  by  a. noun-sentence  introduced  by  the  conj.  se;  cf.  §  255,  6/>. 
E.g.  Abofra  no  afwe  ase,    ma  no  sol  the  child  has  fallen,  lift  him  up! 
Obiara  a  oma  neho  so  no,  wobebere  no  asc,   na  nea  obere  nelio  ase 
no,  wobema  no  so ,    whosoever  cxalteth  himself  shall  be  abased, 
and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  he  exalted. 
Woahye  me  ase   se  wobeba  yi,  meda  wo  ase,  as  ijou  have  (thus) 
promised  mc  to  come,    I  thank  you. 

H\*i.  A  third  kind  of  verbal  phrases  is  that  in  which  a  spe:ific 
subject,  being  a  noun^  of  place,  usually  referring  to  some  noun  or 
pronoun  in  the  possessive  case,  gives  a  specific  meaning  to  the  suc- 
ceeding verb.    E.  g. 


§216.217.  SIMPLE   SENTENCES.     COMPLEMENTS.  125 

('ho  01*  emu  or  a  no  da  li  o,  it  is  or  lies  Open; 

(Miiu  do,  it  is  deep;  emu  gow,  it  is  spacious^  emu  terew,  // /,s  iritle; 
emu  ye   den.  //  is   diflh-all,   ditt'erent  from  eye  den,   il  is  Ixird: 
emu  ye  duvu,   //  is  iiiijjorttdil,   dift".  fr.   eye  duru,    //  is  /iei(r//: 
emu  ye  hare,   /(  is  ens//;  dift".  fr.  eye  hare,   it  is  tiifJit. 
Afiiw  no  liu  da  hi'),  iJidt  plaitldlion  lies  open,  presents  free  ae';es.^. 
Asem  no  niii  da  ho,  fJie  matter  lies  open  or  plain  (hefore  us). 
Odan  no  ano   da  h('i,   the  door  or  oilrance  of  the  house  is  oven. 
Asubontei'i   no  mu   (h),  llud.  river  is  deep. 
Odan  yi  mu  f;"o\v,  t/ris  room  is  spurious. 
Adaki'i  no   mu   terew,   th(U   1>0X  is   wide. 
Asem  yi  mil  ye  den.  this  matter  is  hard  to  he  settled. 
Emu  (or  asem  yi   mu)  sin' me   kakra  or  ntew  ine,  yiy<'', 
//  (or  this  matter  I  is  not  (piite  or  not  snfllrienft//  jjlnin  to  nn: 

!210.  1.  '!'he  fourth,  fifth  and  si vtlt  hind  of  rerhat  phrases  express 
some  hodihj  or  mental  action  or  affedion,  state  or  rondilion,  and  ha\  e 
tliis  peculiarity,  that  .some  pari  of  a  person's  hod//  is  mentioned  as 
tlie  (jrannnatiiud  snhjerl  or  ohje-t  of  the  sentenee,  to  whicli  the  noun  uy 
jironoun  denoting-  tlie  ])erson  (tlie  lofjiral  snt>je'i  or  ohjcrl )  forms  an 
allrihale  in  tlie  ]»ossessive  ease. 

2.  Those  phrases,  whieli  ha\'e  sueh  a  specltic  compound  .v/(/>/r  ■/ (i^  21  7) 
do  not  seem  to  belong-  into  this  chapter  on  tlie  rornplenu'nls  of  the 
]n-edicate,  like  those  with  such  a  specific  compound  ohjerl  (§2lS)| 
hut  the  former  ought  not  to  be  separated  from  the  latter,  and,  in  lact, 
the  notion,  of  the  predirale  is  completed  hi/  the  notion  /mf  in  Ihe  jtUo-e 
of  the  suhjert.  E.  g. 

Oni'pa  no  awii,  Ihfi.t  man  has  died.    Onipa  no  ani  awu,   Ihal  man's 
face  has  died,  i.  e.  that  man  is  ashamed. 

3.  In  §  219  we  shall  find  both  cases  combined  with  each  other  or 
with  some  other  specific  complement. 

4.  The  nouns  that  are  used  in  such  verbal  j)hrases,  as  the  gram- 
matical subject  or  object,   arc  the  following: 

eho,  the  outward  part,  frame,  hody,   also  the  uhole  j)ers(ni  or  .sv//',- 

eti,  tiri,  tirim\  Ihe  head,  the  interior  of  the  head: 

ani,  the  ejfe,  fare;  anim,  the  face;  nton,   the  eijehro/rs; 

ano,  anom,  the  mouth;  a  so,  asom,  the  ear; 

kon,  konmii;  tlie  necJc,  throat;  menewam\  the  <iullet ; 

bo,  koma,  tlie  hreast,  heart;  were,  the  heart,  nund,  memory; 

yam",   tlie  hosom,  the  interior  of  tlie  chest  and  helly; 

nsa,  nsam,  the  hand,  luinds;  basa,  abasam\  abaAv,  the  arm,  arms; 

enan,  anaii,  the  foot,  feet;  ananmu,  the  font-steps,  foot-))rinls. 

SIT.  The  fourth  kind,  of  rerhal  j)hrases  has  a  .specific  compound 
sufiject  (a  personal  noun  oi-  pronoun  in  the  possessive  case,  and  the 
name  of  some  part  of  that  persftns  body).  E.  g. 


126  SYNTAX.  §  217. 

1.  Xc  lio  liim,  popo,  saw,  {his  frame  sJiakes)  he  Iremhles,  quakes,  sliirers  ,* 
DC  lio  yc  (Ipi'i,  he  is  (bodily)  sirotuj  (oye  den,  he  is  hard  in  his  dealings)  ; 
ue  li6  pirim,  ye,  te  yiye,  aye  yiye,  he  is  stromj,  healthy] 
ne  ho  hurn  no,   he  feels  hoi;  ne  ho  boh,  lie  stinks; 
ne  lif)  ye  I'i,  ye  hwini,  ye  tan,  he  is  dirty,  nasty,  ugly; 
ne  ho  ye  fe,  he  is  fine,  handsome,  heautiful^ 

ne  ho  t\Va,   ye  hare,  ye  kainkain,  ye    wesVe,  he  is  quirk,   nimhle; 
ne  ho  at'oni  no,  hia  no,  kyere  no,  yeraw'  no,  he  is  in  a  strait,  in  distress. 
ne  lio  dwiriw  no.  lie  is  amaced,  terrified.  [trouhle,  perplexity ; 

ne  ho  haw  no,  percno,   nseiV  no,  titi  no,  he  is  impatient; 
ne  ho  adwo,   agow  (no),   ka,  neho,  asan  no,  sepew  no,  ato  (no),  atu  no, 
lie  is  at  ease,  calm,  conqtosed,  happy,  joyful,  contented  &c. 

"i.  Ne  ti'i-im'  ye  den,  he  is  cruel; 
ne  tirini  nye,  nyc  no  yiye,    he  has  a  had  conscience,    is  troubled  in 

liis  mind; 
ne  tirim   nye,   nye  no  yiye,   ka  (no),  yc  basabasa,  ye  sakasaka, 

he  is  deranyed.  crazed,  craz'y; 
ne  tirini  kyere  no,  twetvve  no,  ye  no   kesekcse,  ye  no   keserenenene, 

lie  is  in  anyaish,  perplexity. 

3.  N'ani  here,  {his  eye  reddens,)  he  covets;  he  is  anyry;  he  is  grieved; 
u'ani   bu,  he  is  tired  of  waiting;  n'ani   kum,  he  is  slee/nj; 

n'ani  afi,  apae,  atew,  he  is  intetligent,  .shretrd,  cuntiing; 

n'ani  gyina  (ne  na,  ne  kurom),  he  longs  for  {h.is  mother,  his  home); 

n'ani  so  (me),  he  respects,  honours  (me); 

n'ani  gye,  ka,  he  rejoices,  is  glad,  is  merry; 

n'ani  dwo,  he  is  tame,  mild;  (odwo,  lie  is  meek;) 

n'ani  da  ho,  ka   fain',   ka  asc,  he  is  soher,  modest,  quiet; 

n'ani  ye  den,  ye  hyew,  ye  kramakrama,  he  is  hold,  fierce,  unruly,  icild; 

n'ani  wu,  n'anim  gu  ase,  he  is  ashamed. 

4.  N'anim'  ye  duru,  he  is  serious,  venerahle; 
n'anim  ye  hare,  he  is  lightminded. 

o.  N'ani  so  biri  no,  he  is  giddy;  n'ani  so  da  ho,  he  is  awake; 

n'ani  so  atew,  he  has  recovered,  come  to  himself  (from  a  swoon); 

n'ani  so  ka  (==  ne  tirim  ka),  he  is  crazy; 

n'ani  so  ye  krakra,  he  is  in   anguish,  anxiety; 

n'ani  so  ye  sakasaka,  he  is  heirildered; 

n'ani   so  aterew  no,   aye  no  tetere,  he  is  ah.sent,   wander tng; 

n'ani   so  ye  no  ya,  he  is  astonished; 

n'ani  so  nye,  n'ani  so  aye  yiye,  he  is  tipsy. 
G.  N'ano  ye  den,    birebire,    kiirokiiro,    perepere,    he  is    f/uarrelsome, 

n'ano  yc  duru,  he  is  not  talkative;  [talkative; 

n'ano  tew,  awo  (wose),  he  is  eloquent; 

n'ano  ye  dew,  dokO,  fremfrem,  he  is  a  flatterer; 

n'anoni  yc  no  de(w),  he  likes  dainties,  is  dainty-mouthed,  lickerish  ; 

n'anom  akum,  he  has  lost  his  appetite; 

n'anom  atew,  he  has  recovered  his  appetite. 
7.  N'aso  ye  den,  anyin,  aseh,   asiw,  asorow,   awn,  he  is  disohedient; 

n'asom'  adwo  no,  he  is  peaceful,  hapjiy. 


§  218.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     COMPLEMENTS.  127 

8.  Ne  kou  do,  /w.<f  iwli  ('Ihroalj  loves  (deepens?),  i.e.hecorels,  luslfi  for] 
n(^  kon  asen,  he  is  sUffnehed,  sUffliearted,  lieadstroiiff,  sluhhoni; 
ne  kohmu  ye  den,  he  is  slronc),  poicerful. 

9.  Ne  bo  abu,  he  is  out  ofhreath] 

ne  bo  fono  no,  he  feels  inclined  to  vomit  \ 

ne  bo  afuw,   alnxrn,  he  is  un'jry ; 

ne  bo  aduo,  lie  is  appeased^  composed,  sedate,  contented ; 

ne  bo  ato  (ne  yam),  he  is  contented,  well  pleased; 

ne  bo  ye  duru,  he  is  hrave,  cowaffeous. 
10.  Ne  were  ahow,  lie  is  sorrowful;  ne  were  fi,  he  forfjels; 

ne  were  akyekye,  lie  has  heen  comforted. 
n.  Ne  yam'  hyeliye  no,  twitwa  no,  he  is  compassionate; 

ne  yam  ye  no  hyeewliyeew,  his  conscience  torments  him ; 

ne  yam'  ye,  lie  is  (jood-Jiearted,  henifjn,  henevolent,  liberal,  rJtarilahle; 

ne  yam'  ye  nwene;  he  is  illiberal,  stingy,  nigijardly. 

12.  Ne  nsam'  ye  den,  he  is  illiberal,  near,  close,  hard-fisted,  fast-handed; 
ne  nsam  tee,  lie  is  liberal,  generous,  bountiful,  munificent; 

ne  nsa  ka,  (his  hand  touches,)  he  obtains,  receives; 
ne  nsa  n'na,  (his  hand  does  not  rest,)  he  is  diligent. 

13.  N'abasam'  atu,  he  hcis  been  discouraged,  dislteartened. 

218.  Tbe  fifth  kind  of  verbal  phrases  bas  a  specific  compound 
object  (a  personal  noun  or  pronoun  in  the  possessive  case,  and  tbe 
name  of  some  part  of  that  jtersons  body). 

1.  In  some  of  tliese  plirasos,  iha  person  denoted  by  tbe  attribute  in 
the  compound  object  is  identical  with  the  subject.  In  this  case  we  give 
tbe  examples  only  with   pronouns  of  the  3d  pers.  sing. 

a.  We  first  mention  the  verbs  made  reflexive  by  taking  the  reflexive 
pronoun,  which  belongs  to  this  kind  of  objective  complements.    E.  g. 

Obyebye  neho,  ohoahoa  neho,  gkyere  neho,  omk  neho  so, 
he  boasts,  brags,  vaunts,  shows  himself,  exalts  himself; 

gk;i  neho,  he  ynores,  stirs,  is  active;  onu  neho,  he  repents; 

osakra  neho,  he  disguises  himself;  otwa  neho,  he  turns  round. 

Some  intransitive  verbs  may  thus  be  made  reflexive  with  almost 
the  same  or   with  an  altered  meaning;  as, 

Odah  kgo  nifa,  he  turned  to   the  right; 

gdah'  neho  kge,  he  turned  and  went  off; 

gdan'nan  neh5,  he  does  some  business,  he  trades,  traffics. 

h.  Phrases  in  which  other  nouns  (of  those  mentioned  in  §  21 G,  4) 
occur,  are  the  following: 

Wafa  ne  tirim'  (Jie  has  take^i  in  his  head,)  he  recollects,  remembers; 

of  we  ne  tirim\   (lie  looks  in  or  into  his  head,)  he  tries  to  recollect; 

gbg  ne  tii-im  (pgw),   he  (lies  a  knot  in  his  head,)  devises,  plans  out; 

otu  ne  tirim  agyina,  he  (goes  to  council  in  his  head,)  devises,  deli- 
berates; he  examines  himself. 

Hem.  In  the  two  last  phrases  ne  tirim'  is  not  an  object,  but  an  ad- 
junct of  place,  or  an   attribute   of  the  oljject  pgw   and   agyina. 


128  SYNTAX.  .     §2l9. 

O'gye  n'aiii,  lie  re  jo/res,  amuses  himself; 

ototo  or  otwsi  n'ani,  he  looks  ahout-^ 

oyiyi  (n')cini,  he  is  Jieedless,  careless; 

oto.w  or  otPtow  n'liiii,  he  opens  his  eifes;  he  is  caiilioKS; 

o(l\vo  n'ani,   he  moderates  Jiis  liasle,  his  demand 

( >nmn;i  or  okiim   n'anim,  lie  darkens  or  disfiijures  Jiis  face: 

otew  n'anim,  he  is  friendli/,  (frarious,  clicerfnl; 

oyi  (n')anini   (with  a  sncceeding  verb),  he  has  llie  di;idr</  intenliiai 

(to  do  .something),  lie  does  if  ojienh/.  frank/if. 
( >yi  n'ano,  he  speaks  or  jtleiids  for  himself. 
Oyi  n'aso,  he  is  heedless,  careless-^ 
okyea  n'aso,  he  (hends  his  ear.)  jierrerls  jiidiiinenl: 
oserei'i  n'aso,  he  prirks  up  his  ears,  listens  to  a  sound  from  a  distance: 
ovVen  n'aso,  gye  aso,  oye  n'aso  denim,  komni,  lie  listens  altenlirely. 
Ototo  ne  koii,  Jie  looks  about  in  a  haiifihti/,  impudent,  contemptuous 

manner  ;  obg  ne  kon,  he  talks,  ijires  utterance  to  his  tliouahts. 
Osi  ne  bo,  he  dares,  atfemj)ls  (so  g-ne  no  beko,  to  fujlit  irith   him)', 
gta  ne  bo,  he  sets  his  heart  at  rest,  composes  his  miml. 
Oyi  ne  yam  (with  a  succeeding  verb)  he  does  from  his  heart,  sinrereh/, 
Oyi  ne  nsa  (a  decent  expression  =^  odi  di),  he  eats.        [milliufili/. 
Ogow  ne  nsani,  he  is  libend,  munif'ii-ent:  he  is  slwk  in   irorkimf. 
Wapa  abaw,  he  has  drawn  off  his  hands,  has  ijiren  it  iiji  in  despair. 

"2.  In  some  of  those  phrases,  the  ohje't  refers  to  a  j>erson  different 
from  the  suhjat.  In  tins  case  we  give  tlie  examples  with  tlie  jtronoiin 
of  the   1st  ])ers.   sing,  for  the  object;  as, 

Onim  {or  wahu)  me  tirim,  he  knows  mil  mind  {mil  faithfulness). 

Oso  m'ani,  he  pleases  me ;  eyi  m'ani,  //  disjileases  me. 

Okyi  m'anim,  he  dislikes,  sjiuns,  detests  me; 

otiatia  m'anim,  he  ahuses,  contemns,  scorns  me. 

Aduah  no  agye  m'anom,   tliis   food  Jias  hccomc  my  favourite  dish. 

Nsem  no  aka  m'ano,  I  ran  repeat  the  words  fluentlii. 

Ototo  m'ano,  he  arc-uses  me  falsely.  Okasa  m'ano,  he  is  mii  spokesman. 

Otwe  m'aso,  he  pulls  ine  hij  the  ear,  i.  e.  he  punishes  me. 

Ofnw  me  bo,   oluirix  me  bo,   (oyi  me  abufuw,)   lie  ercrites  ni/i  anijer\ 

otu  me  bo,  he  disheartens,  disrouraffes,  frifiJitens,  apjnils  me. 

Ohow  me  were,   (oyi  me  awerehow,)  he  fjrieves  me] 

gkyekye  me  were,  he  comforts,  conscdes  me. 

Otu  m'abasam,  he  discouruffes,,  disspirits  me. 

319.  In  the  sixtJi  kind  of  verhal  plirases,  a  sperif'ic  compound 
suhjeri  or  ohjert,  and  some  similar  or  other  sped  fir  complement,  are 
combined,  some  of  them  containing  two  verbs.  (Any  of  the  kinds 
mentioned  in  §  211-218.  220.  is  combined  with  any  other  of  them,  or 
with  any  complement  or  adjunct).   E.g. 

Ne  ho  aba  ne  ho  bio,  he  has  re-orered  from  Jiis  sickness; 

ne  ho  ka  ne  ho,  he  is  ha))pii,  rontent,  well  jil eased; 

ne  ho  hyia  ne  ho,  he  has  all  lie  wants  ; 

ne  ho  tua  ne  ho,  he  is  fat,  well  fed,  corpulent; 


§  219.  SIMPLE   SENTENCES.    COMPLEMENTS.  129 

oda  nelio  so,  lifi  is  on  his  (judrd: 

gdo  nclid  to  me  so,  lic  louiinits  himself  In  we,  rniijUles  in  me. 

Ne  ti  n'so  no  soa,  lie  is  liijhbiiinded. 

N'aiu  ba  Tn('  so,  he  reinctnhers  me; 

ii'aiii  ba  neho  so,  lie  comes  to  himself:,  A^l.  I?,  11.  Liik.  15, 17. 

ir.iui  bo  me  so,  his  look  fulls  on  me; 

n  aiii  (la  me  so,  lie  hopes,  confides  in  me; 

iraiii  (la  iielio  so,  he  w  cmdioiis,  heedful,  war//; 

'      iTaiii  aka  me  so,  n'ani  ato  me  so   dwen.  he  shires  iil  me: 

n'ani  aka  ni'anim,  he  hiis  heco)ne  co)ifidentiid  or  fduiilinr  irilJi  me: 

iTaiii  apa  me  so,  he  has  forfjolten  me; 

iTani  atra  ne  ntyii,  he  is  superrilious: 

n'ani  ati'i  ato  ne  nsam",  n'ani  ye  no  ntiiMMitire,  n'ani  ye  no  totototo, 

eye  no  aniani,  he  is  in  anxiely,  (jfief,  ronfnsion,  jterplej'ii/f,  cou- 

slernalion  &c. 

ode   n'ani  to  me  so,  he  confides  in  me,  sels  his  I  rust  in  me: 

ia   wo  ani  to  m'anim  ye  ma  no.  do  him  lliis  fimnr  for  iin/  sake: 

ol)u  n'ani  ga(.  .)so,  he  winks  at  (ilj; 

oka  n'ani  gu  so,  he  shuts  his  eyes  (for  sleep,  in  deatb); 

omfui  n'ani  tew,  he  twinkles; 

okoyi  n'ani  so  kakni,  he  is  (join'i  to   lake  a   nap; 

oda  or  odeda  n'ani  akyi,  l  ,  ,      ,  , 

TV     1  v',      ..     ,     1     ,  ,.       (lie  or  she  has  ininton  eues: 

odwuawo  nam   akyi   nantew,  )  ■' 

ogyen  or  otu  or  otutu  n  ani  fwe  me.  he  fi  res  his  ei/es  on  me,  reijards 

me  fi redly,  steadfastly; 
dpupuw'  n'ani  fkasa)  kyeree  me,  he  spoke  rouiilily  to  me:  den.  4^,7.30. 
wayi  m'ani  abye  me  nkyenmu,  lie  has  disappointed  me; 
ontwa  n'ani   n'fvie  n'akyi,   he  is  constant,  steadfast; 
esi  n'ani  so,  it  comes  into  his  mind: 

nsa,  atew  n'ani  so,  lie  has  become  soher  from  his  intoriridion. 
Obere  n'ano  ase,  he  moderates  his  speech; 
on(to)to  n'ano  ase,  he  does  not  hold  his  ton<ine; 
ontow  n'anom  tOci  ma,  he  did  not  speak  a   irord; 
wohkasa  woiiho  ano,  they  don't  speak  irith  each  other: 
otutu  m'ano  sisi,  he  distorts,  confounds  ichat  J  am  sai/ina. 
Oprapnia  n'aso  aky'i  (de  guu  so),    he   did   not    listen  to.  ininld  nut 

hear  or  took  no  heed  of  it  at  all. 
Ne  bo  da  ne  yam',   he  is  of  ()Ood  cheer  or  courage,  easy,  careless: 
ne  ho  ato  ne  yam,  he  is  of  (food  cheer,  happy,  well  content,  his  heart 

is  at  ease ; 
ne  koma  apae  ne  yam,  he  is  utterly  terrified: 
obere  ne  bo  ase,  he  relaxes  his  anyer; 
oto  {or  oto)  ne  bo  ase,  he  is  patient; 
gtg  ne  bo  ase  kye,  he  is  lonysafferiny; 
ot\Va  nu^  bo  to  me  yam,   he  appeases  me. 
Ne  nsa  liyia   ne  h6,  he  prorides  irilh  his  oirn  hand  for  all  his  irants. 

S30.    A  serenth  kind  of  rerhal  phrases  consists  of  a  yy/v'^vyv'// .md 
a  snpptlementid  rerh. 

y 


130  SYNTAX-  §  221. 

1.  The  .siij)jtlem('ntal  verb  enlarii'es  the  iiotimi  of  the  iiriucijial  one 
so  as  to  form  a  new  notion. 

A  common  objective  com])h'ment  is  joined  (or  un<lersto(Kl)  eitht-r  to 
the   principal  vi'rb,   as  in 

gye  di,  gye  tie,  to  beUeve\ 

ka  f\Ve,  so  fwe,  lifiam  tie,  lo  hisle,  ir/>  (^  110): 
or  to  tlie   supplemental  verb,   as  in 

koto  sere,  to  supplirate:)  su   fre,  lo  iiiiplorc: 

kasa  kyere,  io  instnict  (§  109,  31 ). 

hfi  ma,  to  mil,  to  sijmpathize  iriOi: 

di  ma,  kasa  ma,  to  ad  ov  speak  for,  iitlerrcde  for.  defend,  adro-alf. 

2.  The  supplemental  verh  adds  some  particular  circumstance  or 
general  relation  to  the  notion  of  the  principal  verb,  like  an  adjaiui 
of  manner  or  time.    E.  g. 

kasa  sail  mu,  kasa  ti  mu,    to  speak  ivitli  repetitions-^  (Wokasa 

sail  mu  pi,  yon  repeat  too  often  icliat  you  hare  said  already.) 
kasa  sie,  to  make  a  previous  ayreement', 
ka  sie,  to  foretell,  predict;  di  sie,  to  settle  hefore-liand. 

Adiasie  (=;  asem  a  wadi  asie)  n  ye  'di-na,  a  matter  settled  hef ore- 
hand  is  not  diffimll  to  be  adjusted. 
The  verb  sie  may  thus  be  added  to  other  verbs,   and  it  may  ha\  e 
the  lime  or  event,  for  or  against  which  something  is  done,  alter  it  as 
a  complement,  constituting  with  it  a  terminatire  <tdjun':t   to  the  prin- 
cipal verb  ;  see  §  243  h.  and  Hem. 


CHAPTER  V. 
Extension  of  the  Predicate. 


H'HA,  'V\w  p>redi(ate,  whether  it  consist  of  a  single  verb  (§10.')) 
or  have  complements  with  it  (§  198),  may  be  extended  by  adjuncts, 
i.  e.  by  words  which  express  any  circumstances  of  1.  plarc^  2.  iinw, 
3.  manner,  4.  cause  &c. 

These  adjuncts  are  not  necessary  to  complete  the  sense  of  the  verb, 
but  are  accessory  p)arts  of  the  predicate. 

Bern,  lu  the  folUnv-ing  paragraphs  (,">22 — 243)  we  treat  the  circu»ista)iccs  of 
2)lace,  time,  manner,  cause  dc.  more  in  theii*  logical,  than  iji  their  orammatical 
relation  to  the  principal  verb  of  the  seutenee,  i.  e.  we  eoiitiiie  oiu'selves  not  only 
to  such  ex]n'essions  as  are  ol)viousl\-  adjuncts  of  a  predicate,  but  nu^ntion  also  those 
eases  in  wliieli  an  adjunct  in  the  English  language  is  expressed  in  Tshi  by  an  addi- 
tional predicate,  co-ordinate  (.mostly  iu  the  form  of  a  contracted  sentence)  to 
the  principal  one.  Cf.  §.  245,  2a.  253^^- 

'\^'e  call  the  verb  which  ui  such  cases  expresses  the  principal  action  of  the  subject, 
the  principal  verb,  and  the  verb  which  expresses  any  circumstance  of  that  action 
ui  the  form  of  a  co-ordinate  predicate,  an  auxiliary.  In  some  cases,  the  verb  I'xpres- 
siug  only  a  circum.sta7ice  of  an  action  is  even  the  only  predicate  of  the  senteiice, 
taking  the  infinitice  of  the  verb  that  contains  the  action  itself,  as  its  grammatical 


§222.223.        SIMPLE  SENTENCES.  ADJUNCTS.  I'M 

coiiiiilcinud.- — It  is  tliouulit  cijnvoiiinit  to  have  the  diffrroiit  ways  of  cxjirrssinii' 
tlui  (■iri-iiinstaiiccs  in  qiicstioii  luit  toi:;('tlu'r  in  tliis  place;  only  tlio  eases  in  wliieji 
lliey  are  cxpressiMl  [)y  subordmate  sentences  will  be  reserved  for  the.  i;t}2fJ<) — 2S(). 

1.   J7te  Adjunrt  of  Fla<-e. 

2!i!i.  1.  Adjimcls  of  plure^  attached  to  the  predicate,  sliow  a  cir 
ciiiiistaiice  ot place  in  answer  to  the  questions:   inliere?  ivhiihi.'r?  /rjifii  ■<■':■ 

2.  They  are  expressed  by  nouns  of  place  (absolute  or  with  relation 
to  things  and  persons)  or  hy  pronomis  and  adverh.s  of  pUire  (§  lis. 
122-125.  127.)  either  o.  entirely  ecjnal  in  form  to  coriq)lei)Wiils  of  jdacc 
(§  207.  20S),  i.  e.  merely  added  to  the  predicate,  without  an  adilitional 
verb,  —  the  only  difference  is,  tliat  the  adjunct  is  not  iiecesaarji  to 
the  verb  — ;  or  h.  they  are  introduced  by  rtHxvY/«rf/ ??6'r?>.s- [co-ordinate 
to   the  principal],   which   take  them   as  their  complements. 

We  consider  the  latter  case  (hj  as  the  rule,  §  22.'>.  224,  and  tlu- 
<niiission  of  the  auxiliary  verb  (<()  as  the  exception,  §  225. 

!^^»S.  I'liese  [co-ordinate,  or]  auxiliary  verhn,  alone  or  to^-ethci- 
with  the  postposition  used  in  tlie  adjunct,  in  many  cases  answer  to 
English  prepositions,  cf.  §117,  ^.:  in  others,  they  have  no  e([Ui\aleHt 
in   English,   the  latter  rendering  the  adjunct  mei'cly  by   an   adverb. 

'I'hey  are  taken  from   the  locativi-  verbs  specified   in  §  2()i'^,  viz. 

1.  wo;  2.  nam,  fa;  these  verbs  refer  the  action,  or  the  subject  or 
object  of  the  ])redicate,  to  a  place,  as  going  on  or  l)eing  there,  (ttl. 
in,  oil  (tc.)  ■without  showing  a  direction. 

3.  si,  gyina,  combined  Avitli  an  an  m  u :  those  I'itlier  refer  to  rfsl  in 
a  place,  or  imply  a  direction. 

4.  ba,  ko,  used  aloue  or  as  ingresbi\e  prelixcf^  i^§  i)6;  with  the  \erl)s 
si,  du,  so,  ka,  pern  and  others;  fwe,  to,  gu,  kyene;  these  verbs 
express  direction  lo  a  place.  Other  directions  are  expressed  by  kycrc 
—  lOH'nrds;  twa — a'-ro.s.s;  tra  —  over.,  beyond;  fi  —  from;  &c. 

Hem.  The  auxiliaries  fi,  nam,  and  sometimes  fa,  with  their  comple- 
ments, precede,  the  others  succeed,  the  principal  verb  anrl  its  complement. 

X.OWi  ne  dwuma  wo  ofie,  li.e  carries  on  Jiis  husines-s  at  Jiome. 

O'di  ne  gua  wobabi,  J/e  is  purHiiiny  his  trade  so)nen:here. 

Nwura  relinv  wo  tiirnm\  ireeds  are  shootiny  tip  in  tlie  yarden. 

O'nya  aduah'  pi  wo  n'asase  so,  he  obtains  much  food  on  his  land. 

O'turu  ne  ba  wo  ii'akyi,  ,v//c'  carries  her  child  on  her  back. 
2.  Onam  nifenserem'  koo  dan  mu,  lie  yot  into  the  room  throuyh  the  ivintl«n\ 

Ofaa  1)6h  mu  guane,  or:  oguan  faa  bon  mu,  he  fled  thro uyJt  the  rollcy. 

Menam  fam'  mebae,  mamfa  nsiiani,  I  came  by  land,  not  by  irater. 
',).  Yesu  sii  yen  anahmu  wui,  Jesus  stood  in  our  place  died,  i.  e.  Jesus 

died  in  our  stead. 
4.  Miguaree  mebaa  mpormo,  I  swam  to  the  shore. 

Oguah  koo  ahabah  mii,  he  jlcd  into  the  bush. 

Otutuu  mmirika  koduu  kurotia,  he  ran  on  to  the  end  of  the  town. 


132  .      SYNTAX.  §  224.  225. 

(_)t(nv'  (lu;i   IK)  twee  ho,  lie  felh'd  l/tc  tree  (to  tlie  g-i-ound). 

Oliun'iw  til  liyeii  ran  too  pom',  lie  sj)raii(i  froui!  (lie  sjiip  /Jiio  (lie  sea. 

"NVobuu  no  nsA  gnu  iiMkyi,   (licif  tied  his  Jiands  hehiini  his  Ixitk. 

"Wotow  no  kyenee  t;irc  no  mu,  lie  iLHts  ctist  itilo  (he  lidce. 

Wotow   won  gun  nsu  no  mu,  (lieii  tvere  east  iiilo  (lie  irtiler. 

Opotve  wo  no  too  gyji  mu,  Jie  shoolc  off'  (lie  siiidce  iido  (lie  (ire. 

Otoivw^'  ne  nsam'   kyeree  no,  fie  spread  forth  his  Inuids  (ointrd  hmi. 

Miguaree  mitwaii  asu  no,  1  straw  (liroiujfi  (lia(  rirer. 

Ohuruw  traa  amoa  no,  he  leaped  over  (he  pit. 

Mill   Ki'imase  na  mereba,   1  am  couiiii;)  from  Knmase. 

Oi'ii  dua  so  tVvee  tarn"  he  fell  doirn  from  a  tree. 

Ofii   (or  oil?)  ne  daii   mu  free  me.  he  called  me  from  his  Jioase,  i.  o. 

he,  heing  in  his  house,  called  me. 
Ofree  me  fii  m'adwuma  ano,  fie  called  me  (airai/)  from  iiii/  irorlc: 

hut  it  seems  more  correct  to  use  wo  in  such  cases: 
Ofree  me  wo  m'adwuma  ano,  he  called  me,  heiii()  at  mif  a-orlc. 
Rem.  A'erhs  like  yi,  gye,    (o  (ake  oii(,  off,  airaij  from,  (o  rescue, 
save  from,  may  have  the  auxiliary   wo  or  fi  joined  to  them.    E.  g. 
Oyii  me  fii  m'ahohiam',  fie  took  me  out  of  my  trouhle. 
Gye  me  wo  m'atamfo  nsam",  delirer  me  from  mp  enemies! 

S34.    Two  or  more  adjuncts  of  place  may  be  combined.    E.  g. 
Ofre  me  fi  lia  ba  ne  iikyen,  fie  calls  me  from  here  (o  him. 
Oguah  faa  Dat4  koo  Osii,   fie  fled  hif  (or  via)  Date  to  Osu. 
Ofii  Osu  guan  koo  Ada',  fie  fled  from  Osu  to  Ada. 
Oti'iu  kw^an  iii  ho  faa  Akyem  koo  Dwabeu  wo  Asante.  //('  (ravelled 

from  (heuce  (firough  Akem  (o  Dicaheu  in  Asanle. 
Ogu;'in   bail  me  nkyen  wo  m('>  (i,  fie  fled  (o  n,e  into  inij  house. 

323»  The  auxiliary  wo,  sometimes  also  kg,  is  omitted  (§  222,  a.) 
1.  after  the  principal  verb,  when  the  sense  is  plain  without  it,  espe- 
cially in  the  Akem   dialect.    E.  g. 

^Imofra  goru  (wg)  abgnten  so,  children  are  playing  in  the  street. 

AVgagyaw  no  (wg)  hg,  they  have  left  him  (liere. 

A>'oayi  no  lig,  they  fiave  removed  fiim  thence  (i.  e.  killed  him). 

Osonuia  no  (koo)  n'afuw  mu,  he  sent  fiim  into  his  plantation. 

2.  Wlicii  the  adjunct  of  place,  esjiccially  one  of  the  pronouns  ehe? 
eh  a,  ehg,  is  emphatically  put  at  the  head  of  the  sentence,  followed 
by  na  (§247,4.  Hem),  the  auxiliary  wg  is  always  omitted.  E.g. 

Eha  na  meye  adwuma,  fiere  1  am  ivorkinff. 
Ehe  na  eye  wo  yaw'?  where  do  you  feel  pain? 
(In  'Wo  he  ye  wo  yaw?    lit.   tliy    wfiere  i.  e.    icfial  plare   of  your 
hody  causes  you  pain?'  the  adjunct  of  place  is  converted  into  the  subject.) 

3.  The  adjunct  of  place  may  (without  wg)  precede  the  object  of 
the  verb,   and  is  then  like  an  attribute  to  that  object.    E.  g. 

O'dweu  ne  komam'  asemmone   =  odweii  asemmone  wg  ne  komam", 

he  devises  evil  in  his  fieart. 
Osere  me  ho  ade  =  gsere  ade   wg  me  I'lkyeii,  fie  heys  tfiiiKjs  of  me. 


226-228.  SIMPliE   SENTENCES.     ADJUNCTS.  133 


2.  Tlic  Adjunct  of  Time. 

224>.    Adjiuicls  of  l/iuc,  att;iclied  to  the  predicate,   show 

1.  Suiiic  particular y^o//?/  or  j)eriod  of  (/i»c,  answering  to  tlic  (|ii('.sti()u: 
ivheil'^  (la  a  general  way  the  time  of  an  action  is  expressed  by  the 
Icnscii.) 

2.  Diiralioii  of  time,  answering  to  tlie  questions:  lioiv  Ion;)':'  since 
wlien?  lilt  when? 

4.  JJefiinninii,  roniiuuance  or  conlinnaliun  and  end  of  an  action 
(without  specifying  a  time). 

3.  I{i2)Clition,  answering  to  the  (piestion:  hoiu  often? 

*^*ri7.    Circnnistaires  of  time  are  ex])ressed 

1.  by  nouns  and  adverbs  of  time,  including  nouns  with  jxistpositions, 
as  specified  iti  §129.130. 

2.  by  [co-ordinate]  auxidar//  rerhs  introducing  such   nouns:    viz. 
wo  is  sometimes  used  to  introduce  postpositional  phrases  answering 

to  English  phrases  with  the  prepositions  at,  in,  on,  after  &c. 
fi  answers  to  the  Engl,  prepositions  from,  since] 
kosi,  kodu,  besi,  bedu,  answer  to  the  Engl.  prep.   ////,   uidd. 

(The  auxiliary  fi  usually  precedes,  the  others  succeed  the  princi[»al  verb.) 

3.  by  co-ordinate  rcrt)S  or  vcrlxd  phrases  combined  with  the  prin- 
cipal verb  as  auxiliaries,  before  or  behind,  or  with  its  infinitive^  in 
which  case  tlie  verb  expressing  time  is  the  only  verb  of  the  sentence. 

4.  by  adverbial  sentences,  on  which  see  §  2G1— 266. 

5.  sometimes  by  a  co-ordinate  predicate,  beside  those  auxiliaries 
(2.  3.),  in  a  contracted  or  ronne-ted  or  un'vnnected  sentence;  sec  in 
§  2.53=^.  265,  1  Rem.  a. 

228.  Examples  with  merely  adverbial  adjuncts  of  time  (§  227, 1), 
put  before  or  after  the  subject  with  its  predicate. 

1.  Adjuncts  denoting  a  point  or  period  of  time,  or  a  succession  of  such. 

Ene  yebedu  fie,  to  day  tvc  shall  arrive  at  home. 

(Jsi'i  ato  pi  'ne,  it  has  rained  much  to-day. 

Enera  na  ue  ba  koyaree,  ijesterdai/  his  child  fell  si'-Jc. 

Eden  'ti  na   wamma  'nora?   wh//  did  he  not  come  yesterdaij? 

Ne-nnansa  na  mihciu  no,  three  days  a;io  I  sau:  Jiim. 

(:;=  Mihiiti  no,  ne  nnansri  ni,  or.:  nnansd  ni  k  mihiiCi  no.) 

Okyena  anopa  mesim',  to-morrow  morninfi  I  shall  start. 

Yen  de,  yebi/kg  okyf'nakyi,  we  shall  (10  the  day  after  to-morrow. 

Mereba  mprempren  (Ak.  seseara),  /  shall  come  immediately. 

Mprempreh  odan'   neho  ba  hayi,  na  mprempren  odaiV  neho  ko  hayi 

bio,  he  turns  now  here,  now  there. 
Woamma  ntem  'ne,  you  did  not  come  soon  to-day. 
Mehkoo  Akwam'  da  or  pen,  J  have  never  been  in  AJcwam. 
Ne  mmofraase  wansua  biribi  pa  bi,  he  learned  nothiny  in  his  youth. 


134  SY^'TAX.  §  229.  230. 

Nr  kaiikycrckycri'  no,  abo  na  \vo(l('  tow,  akyiii  yi  ansa  na  atci  wodo 
clailr  akorab(')  jjoiiiau  tow,  at  (he  vcr//  f'lrnl.  sloncs  were  disrIi.atuitiL 
hid  afienvards  iron  bullets. 

2.  Adjuncts  denoting  duration. 

Aliiitiiini  menyo  adwiima  da,  1  rannot  alirai/s  norJi. 

IMckoliomo  kakra,  1  am  (join;!  to  rest  a  little. 

Oltrtni  lia  nnansa  bi,  he  will  stay  here  some  days. 

Obedi  ]io  nnannu  so  nnansa,  he  icill  j)ass  (here  tn'u  or  three  days. 

AVayij  adwiima  adesjit',  Jte  has  worked  all  day  (lilt  niyht). 

]\Iobehn  anianc  dadii,  ye  shall  have  trihidation  ten  days. 

.').  Adjuncts  denoting  repetition. 

Woyy  sa    da,  they  often   (or  always),  do  so. 

Dii  ate  wobye  fa,  erery  year  tJiey  celebrate  a  festiral. 

Woko  Ycrusalem  d;t  af'ribyia,  iliey  went  to  Jeriisahin  cnrii  iicar. 

^lako  bo  m'pen  abien',  7  hare  been  there  tiriic. 

I.   ^lixed  examples. 

Opranna'  akyi  na  osu  to  d.i,  after  thunder  it  always  rains. 

Ene  wako  asu  preko  pc,  to-day  she  Jtas  been  for  water  only  once. 

3!20.    Adjimcts  of  time  introduced  by  auxiliary  verbs  (§  227,  2), 

1.  denoting  duration  by  stating  tbe  time  of  beyinniny  or  end: 
(Jli  ne  nimofraase  yare,  he  is  sick  from  liis  infancy. 

Enera  miiii  anopa  meyee  adwuma  koduu  anwumraere,  ene  nso  inaye 
fi  nnonson  mabesi  nnonnum,  na  okyena  meye  niafi  unonson  niakosi 
nnonsiti,  yesterday  I  worlced  from  morniny  till  eveniny,  to-day  from 
7  to  5  o'clock,  and  to-morrow  I  shall  work  from  7  to  0  o'clock. 

Di  "nokware  kodu  wuni\  be  faitliful  unto  death. 

2.  denoting  approximate  duration  (cf§  100,4): 

Waye  adwunia  beye  se  dadu,  he  has  worked  about  ten  days. 
Wadi  (be)boro  m'iribyia  aduosia,  he  is  more  than  sixty  years  old. 

330.  Adjumts  of  time  expressed  merely  by  verbs  (§227,3.226,2.3.4.) 

1.  Indefinite  duratioyt  of  action  expressed  by  kye,  see  §  2ol  (107, 
17.18.) 

2.  Itepetition  of  action  (§  107,  20-22). 

AsantefVi  ne  Akyemfo  anya  nkoe,  the  Asantes  have  repeatedly  fouyht 
Ota'  ko  Nkran,  lie  often  yo^s  to  Akra.  [with  the  Akems. 

Monsan  mmu  akonta   no  bio,  oast  up  that  account  ayain. 
Meka.  mitim'  se:  manbfi,  J  repeat  that  I  have  not  seen  it. 

3.  Commencenwnt  of  action  (cf.  §  107, 14.  iTi:  tbe  following  exani}tles 
partly  belong  to  §  229,  1.) 

"Woanya  rebo  dgu,  iJtey  art  already  rinyiny  the  bell. 
3Iinnyri  minnuu  bo  e,   J  have  not  yet  arrived  at  that  poi)tt. 
Wafi  ase  rekyerew  ne  nboma,  hehasbeyun  to  writehislctler.  (§21 4,1  A.) 
Ofi  baa  lul  enye  'ne,  lit.  he  beyan  came  here  it  is  not  to-day  i.  e. 

■//  is  not  only  since  to-day  tltitt  the  rawe  here. 
Efi  bo  ara  E'nyiresifo  tunii  mu  fi  yee  den,  from  that  time  the  Kny- 

lisli  became  more  and  more  potcerful. 


§  231.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     ADJUNCTS.  135 

Efi  ho  iia  Wf'itii  ase  iiyafi  ti'uni  ilc-bc-pom  'ucyi,  fron>  that  lime  thcy 
hc(jan  to  ohtaiv  the  jx/iccr  tchrh  they  hane  unto  this  day. 

EH  lio  ara  na  Xapoleon  tiimi  fi  yee  kcse  clii  koo  so,  from  that  time 
the  power  of  Napoleon  teas  continuaUy  intreasimi. 

4.  Continuance  and  continuation  of  action  (§  107,  16). 

(Jda  so  (la,  he  sleeps  still.    Meko  so  inagoru,  I  shall  ifo  on  in  ptayinif. 

Wotoa  so  kekrl  asem.  tliey  continue  their  speeciies. 

0.  Completion  of  action  (§  107,  19). 

<_)kan  "I'llioina  no   \Vici,  nr:  o\viee  nhoma  no  kan,  he  road  the  hook 

to  the  end,  or  he  finished  readini)  the  hook. 
Wayr  u'adwiuna  a\vie,  or:  wawie  n'adwuma  yij,  hx  lias  finished  hfs 

tcorJc. 

231.  Tlic  verb  kye,  to  last  (lonnj,  to  he  Ivmj  i.  »,'.  of  loii<i  daraliun. 
is  used   in  different  ways: 

1.  As  an  independent  intransitire  verb,  it  expresses,  in  a  ijeneral 
way,  some  duration  of  existence  or  of  a  stay  in  some  place,  whence 
it  may  take  a  complement  of  place.    E.  g. 

Woko  a,  nkye!    when  you  ()o,   do  not  stay  away  lony! 

D;i  gko  ho  a,  okye  ho  se,  as  often  as  he  goes  tliere,  he  slays  there 

very  lonij. 
^lerenkye  ha  bio,  1  shall  no  more  he  here  a  lony  time. 
Okoo  kurow  bi  so  koky(^(i,  he  went  to  some  tou:n  and  staqed  out  lonii. 

2.  As  an  independent  causative  and,  therefore,  transitive  verb,  it 
takes  an  infinitive  as  its  object,  and  expresses  that  the  action  denoted 
by  that  infinitive  will  not  soon,  or  not  easily,  come  to  pass,  or  if  it 
is  put  in  the  negative,  that  it  will  soon,  or  easily,  take  place.    E.  g. 

Okyee  ne  ba,  he  delayed  his  cominfi,  did  not  come  for  a  lony  time. 

Pore  yi  kye  bo  sen  kuriiwa  no,  this  jar  delays  hrealiimj  surpasses 
that  jay,  i.  e.  this  jar  is  more  durahle  than  thai  jug. 

Kuruwa  a  ete  se  yi  nkye  bo,  sueli  a  jw)  as  this  here  does  not  de- 
lay hreaJciny,  i.  e.  easily  hrealis. 

3.  When  following  after  a  principal  verb  as  an  auxiliary  [or  co- 
ordinate] verb  in  the  same  tense  (or  after  a  future  tense  in  the  con- 
secutive form),  it  denotes  some  duration  of  the  state  or  action  expres- 
sed by  the  former.    E.  g. 

Oda  kye,  lie  sleeps  lony.    Ote  ho  kye,  Ite  is  sittiny  there  a  long  while. 

Otraa  ho  kyee,  he  remained  there  a  good  while. 

Wantra  ho  ankye,  he  did  not  remain  there  long. 

Meko  makotrct  ho  makye.  I  go  to  stay  there  for  a  long  time. 

4.  When  following  after  tlie  affirmative  preterit  form  of  a  verb,  in 
the  affirmative  perfect  tense  or  in  the  negative  preterit  tense,  forming 
a  sentence  by  itself,  yet  dependent  from  the  preceding  verb,  it  denotes 
that  the  event  of  that   \erb   has  passed  lonrj  or  not  long   ago.    E.  g. 


136  SYNTAX.  §  2;32-'2;U. 

Milu'ui  no  akytj  (pi,  kakra),  I  saw  him  a  (toi);!,  shoii)  icJu'lc  atjo. 

Oil  flu  nie  oiikyee  e,  he  saiv  me  not  loiin  ago. 

Obaa  lia  akye,  he  came  here  loiuj  a(jo,  or  he  is  here  since  a  lomi  lime. 

Wobae  j'lkye,  it  is  lon()  since  you  came  (and  have  not  come  (Ujain). 

5.  When  fonniiifi;  a  sentence  by  itself,  preceding  another,  it  denotes 
the  long,  or  not  long,  interval  between  the  succeeding  event  and  the 
presence  of  the  speaker  or   a  previous  event.    E.  g. 

Ebekye  ansa  na  wahfi,   //   iriil  he  long  hefore  he  finds  (it). 

Obae  no,  ekyee  ansa  na  okoe  (^or  greko)  bio,  when  he  had  come, 
he  did  no  more  go  for  a  long  time. 

Waba  yi,  ereiikye  na  gbeko  (or  wakg,  okg?)  bio,  having  come  now, 
he  will  soon  go  again. 

Owui  no,  ankye  na  ne  yere  bae,  when  he  had  died,  Ids  wife  came 
soon  afterwards. 

Hem.  In  the  cases  3.4.5.  the  verb  kye  stands  in  the  place  of  the 
adjunct  of  time  in  English. 

3.   The  Adjunct  of  3Ianner. 

553.  Adjnncl.s  of  nninner,  attached  to  the  j)redicate,  answer  to 
the  questions:  Jio/r?  hoir  mnch?  in  what  manner':'  hg  n:hat  means':'  &c. 
and   denote 

1.  manner,  either  qnatiti/,  or  m.ode,  wa//  in,  ivJiich; 

2.  degree  and  extent;  3.  certainty  oy  prohahilitg; 
4.  manner,  implying  other  circumstances: 

a.  means  of  action;  h.  price,  exchange  and  sidjstilation; 
c.  accompaninwnt  or  exclusion. 

!33S.    Circumstances  of  manner  are  expressed 

1.  by  nouns  (without  or  with  postpositions)  and  adrcrtjs  of  manner 
and  degree;  §131-134. 

2.  by  [co-ordinate]  au,xiliary  verbs  having  such  nouns  as  their 
complements; 

3.  by  [co-ordinatej  verbs  or  verbal  phrases  combined  with  tlu^  prin- 
cipal verb,   and  commonly  preceding  it; 

4.  by  adverbial  sentences;  see  §  2r)7-273. 

5.  sometimes  by  ro-ordinate  predicates,  not  auxiliaries,  in  contracted 
or  connected  sentences  \  see  in  §  253a. 

554.  (1.)  Adjuncts  of  quality  or  mode  and  way  in   whi/lt. 
Examples  of  the  case  mentioned  in  §  233,  1.  see  in  §  131,  2.  3.  4.  133, 

l.b.  134,  1.2.  Adding  some  more,  we  put  expressions  according  to 
§  233,  2.  3.  together  with  some  of  them. 

'  y  som  no  nokwarem',  he  serves  him  truly,  indeed  (cf.  §  236). 

Osom  no  nokwareso,  he  serves  him  faithfully. 

Osom  no  sesekwasom  or  mpasompaso,  he  serves  him  carelessly,  not 
earnestly  or  seriously;  =  ohfwe  so  ns<')m  no  yiye. 


§  2;35.  SIMIM.E    SENTENCES.     ADJUNCTS.  137 

'  OtVuY  IK)  olKu-;inso,    he  look  it  hi/  force,   forcihli/;    2  ode  ntiutiinanini' 
f^yt'o  lie  11  sain'  ade,  he  took  liis  tluiKfs  from  him  Ihi  violence. 
'  Aiiuanom  no  gyee  yen  few  so,  the  brethren  receired  us  filadli/; 
■  wodc  few  gyce  ii'cisein  no,  Ihei/  <il(idly  received  his  word. 
^  Ode  anig-ye  koo  ne  kwan,  he  went  his  way  re')oicimu 
•  L^k.00  ne  hkyen  niiiimso,  he  went  to  him  courafieoiisli/ ; 

2  ode  nnam  pa  liyiaa  won,  he  met  them  with  f/ood  coiira<ie\ 

3  oiiam  nnamso  koo  ne  nkyen,  he  went  in  boldly  iinlo  him. 

'  Q'ye  110  brofoni';     •'osua  Brofo  ye;    or:    ofvve  Brofo  de  so  yt-,    he 

does  it  in.   the  F/uropean  fashion;  he    imitates   the  luiroj'cans   in 

doiiifi  it;  he  copies  it  from  the  Europeans. 
2  Yiye  a  oyec   won  no,     wode  yee  no  sa'ara,    or:    -^  wosusi'iw"  so  yejj 

no  bi,   the  (jood  he  had  shown   them,   they  showed  him  likewise 

(requited  it  to  him). 

'  Obasi  me  so  miiofin'm",     \   ^ 

T  -    , ,      ,    ,       I    ,  )  he  came  upon  nw  unawares. 

•'  opatuw   baa  me  so,  |  ^ 

'  O.wiii  prekd  pe  or  afreso,   ^  opatuw   wui,  he  died  suddenly; 

'  owuii  awusiii,  he  died  a  sudden  death.. 

2  Ofrt'-o  me   wo   kokoain"  1  7         ,77  n       1       1     ,-     i 

o -,  .    ",  '  '  /.    -  ]  lie  ratted  mc  secretlii,  clandestnicln. 

•>  oluntaw    or   onam   ase  tvqv  me,  )  •"  ^ 

'  Ofwee  no   diiin,   §  134,  l/ 

-^  ogyeiV  n'ani  fwee  no,  ]ie  looketl  rfosely  at  him. 

'  Ka  no  pefe!   ■' Pae  mu  ka!  speak  it  out,  tell  itjilainly! 

'  Ka  no  yiye!   ■-Tew  w'ano  kasa!  tell  or  speak  it  distin-lly! 

^  Siu'i   wo  ne  mil   kasa!    '  Ka<?a  ma   wonte!  sj)eak  distinctly'. 

•''Onyame   na  od(')m   vee  no  sa'  (ni.u'i  me), 

God  (jraciously  made  it  thus  (for  me). 

^Miyi  me  yam'   meda   wo  ase,  I  thank  you  heartily. 

-  ^  Ne  }ere  de  odo  yii   ne  y/im'  fwee   no, 

his  wife  nursed  him  wilJi  loriny  and  self-deny iny  care. 
'  O'du  n'anim'  nkakra-nkakia,  he  yets  On  by  deyrees,  by  little  and  I  ill  le. 

-  Ode  siiara  uynk  won  so  tumi,  thus  heyraduaJly  yol power  over  Ihcin. 

The  examplfs  in  §209, 1.2.  may  also  be  taken  here. 

3S3.    (2.)  a.  Adjuncts  of  degree,  showing  the  in.tensity  of  an  action, 
state  or  (juality.     Examples  of  §  233,  1.  see  §  133,  2.  lib.  4.  §  134,  3,'. 

'Osiu  pi,  he  wept  mwh.    (Osiii  dennen,  lie  wept  alouA.) 

Mabere  kakra,  1  am  a  little  tired. 

Okwan   no   ware  dodo,   the  way  is  very  or  too  lony. 

Eusono  ne  kyere  yi  dodo  biara,  his  doctrine  differs  not  very  mwh. 

Woaiiye  won  bone  dodo  bi,  tliey  did  not  trouhle  tlieni  very  much. 

Woavvie  won  ase  tore  k()ra,  tliey  were  utterly  extirjKded. 

Kurow  no  ahyew  dwerebe,  the  town  is  completely  burned  down. 

^Okasa  a,  yekame  ate,  when  he  speaks,  we  scarcely  hear  it. 

Dahomefo  nneyee  ktime  aye  se  Asantefo  de,    the  doinys  (manners) 

of  the  Dahomeaus  arc  ahnost  the  sanw  as  those  of  the  Asantes. 
Ekame  ma  aye  du  (Ak.  okama  ma  n'aye.  du),  it  makes  nearly  ten. 
Ekame   nifi  anka  wawi'e  n'afuw   hhin;i   dow, 

he  has  almost  completely  cut  his  u'hole  plantation. 
A'ka  kakni   ua  woaniii   iiiadau    Kristoiii',   Arts  ^^(i,  ^t^.  2!). 


1 38  SYNTAX.  §  236.  237. 

AV(it'\\  ('•(',  no  1)1  a  ckaa  ki'iuia  sr  na  ntoc;,    (lit://    flofHicil    hiiii   ncdrh/ 
lo  (/en III. 
A  k  a  -  k  11  111  a    ua   atr   no  a\\iv  di'i  no,    ckaa    kakr;i    sr   nia   AVoko  iaa 
oiiiaii  no  nliiini,    (oiranlH   the   cud  of  Uial  year  llicu  had  idraul/j 
(■(HK/ncrcd  almost  th-e  ichole  coniitr/j. 
Wi'ircko   no,  (jkaa   kfnna   (F.   ckaa  clc  =  sc)  niA   won  nsa  kaa  olicnc, 
in  the  Ixdtle  the//  almod  cmujht  the  k/iiij. 
h.  Adjn>irt,s  of  extent,   sliowin-;-  the  extent  or    lindtalion    of  a  state- 
ment to  a  certain  action,  subject,  object,  place,  time  &c. 
K.xaniples  see  §  134,  ^a.h.  Cf.  §  277. 

Mintiinii   inernma,   gye  kyena,   7  cannot  come  except  lo-n/orroH'. 
(iye   lia  nko  na   yesi  dan   a   ebeye  yiyc', 

oji///  here  we  inatj  conren/enflij  build  a  house. 
'■.  As  Adjuncts  of  extent  (or  con,cern)  wc;  mention  also 
abstract  nouns  added  to  the  verbs  se,   to  l>c  e({uaJ,   kyefi   or  sen,  to 
sur^niss,   showing-  the  quality,  state  or  action  in  which  the  subject  equals 
or  surjiasses  the  object.    E.  g. 

Ose  no  ahooden,  he  equals  him  in  strenifth: 
L?kyyfi  110  ahoote,  he  surpasses  him  in  heauti/. 

Woscn  me  adidi  a,  mesen  wo  nna,   •//'  /jou  su.rj)ass  me  in  eatinii,   I 
surpass  tiou  in  sleepin.;/.  (Prov.) 
Jiem.  The  noun  of  relation  so  may   be  used  by  itself  as  a  comple- 
ment   (of   comparison)    to    the   same    and    some    other    verbs,    forming- 
specific  verhal  phrases  (§213,214);  as: 

esc  so,  ebo  so,  it  is  equal;  cboro  so,  ekyeii   so,  it  excclls. 

S36.  (3.)  Adjuncts  of  certainty  or  coidinyency. 

Examples  see  also  §  1 35. 
3Ialiu  no  nokwarem\  1  have  seen  him  indeed,  certainly. 
Wakfi  sa'  ampa,  he  has  really  said  so. 
Ebia  {or  sese)  onni  fie,  may  he  he  is  not  at  houie. 
Sesekwa  bi  menya  nsa  mato  anaV 
shall  J  perchance  yet  palmu-ine  to  buy'^ 

337.  (4.)  Adjuncts  of  manner  denoting  the  instrument  or  niea)ts 
of  action.    Cf.  §  108,  26.  27.  131,  1. 

Oboo  mc  kutruku,  kutrumoa,   twere,  lie  struck   me   with  Jiis  fist  &.c. 
Opohko  too  no  anankoti,  a  horse  kicked  him. 

Here  we  Imve  rather  an  otjjeci,  or  a  specific  complement. 
Ofwee  no  mpire,  okaa  no  mma,  he  floyyed  him  (witli  a  whip,  a  rod). 
Ode  poma  boo  me,  he  struck  ine  with  a  staff. 
Onam  atoro  so  yfi  neho  fii  asem  no  mu,  he  extricated  himself  from 

the  matter  by  a  lie  (or  lies). 
Yede  tow  yi  yi  yen  konmu  afoa,   by  this  tribute  we  avert  the  sword 

impendiny  on  our  necks. 
Okrla  sa'  de  kyekyee  me  were,  by  sayiny  this  he  comforted  me. 
b.  Adjuncts  of  manner  imjilying  price,  exchanye,  .sidistitution. 
Metoo  ode  yi  aboodeh,   1  bonyht  this  yam  dearly  (at  a.  hiyh  prwe). 


§  237.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     ADJUNCTS.  139 

W;iiiy;\  no  low  or  nhoonwvv.w,  he  has  (ful  it  i:hcap  or  at  a  h)iv  })rfce. 

^laiiya  no  k\v;i  or  t(!t;i,  7  fiol  it  fur  iiolhiiuj. 

"Mfito  lino  (mama)  dare  asia,  7  hare  huiujhl  oil  for  sir  dollars. 

Ode  dwoasuru  too  ntama,  he  hoHfiht  clolh  for  four  ackics. 

Otoo  asase  uo  mae  beyc  se  d\Voa,    he   boH(jh.L   (he   land    for   aboai 

cifjh.t  acJcie.s. 
^Icde  sika  pi  mctoe,   7  hotujhl  it  for  a  flood  deal  of  ii/oiu'i/. 
Watoii  aburow'  (agye)  dare  anaii,  Ite  lias  sold  com  for  four  dollars. 
(Jtoi'r  ka'  no  mela  no  yoiiko  gyoc  dare  fa,  he   sold   ih.e  riiKf  lo  his 

friend  for  half  a  dollar. 
Mama  no  aberekyi  masesa  og'iiauteii,   7  hare  (jiven  hint  (or  exch.an- 

ficd  (vilh  him)  a  (joal  for  a  .sheep. 
Medc  ddre  du   inesosaa    sika   mfuturu,    7  exchan;ied  len  dollars  for 

(jold-dnst. 
Om;1a  me    kyew    de    sii    di'iku    anaiimii,  or:  ode  kyew  sii  me  dukn' 

aiiaiimii,  instead  of  a  handkerchief  he  (jave  me  a  cap. 
Oye  abofra  no,  ne  n;i  dii  bene  no  miiti  no,   whilst  lie  ivas  i/oiin;!,  hi,s 

mother  reif/ned  for  him  i.  e.  in  his  stead. 
Agyerikwa  no  wu  maa  yeii,  the  Sarionr  died  for  u.s. 
Ycsu  sii  yen  anaiimu  wiii,  Jesus  died  in  our  stead. 

r.  Adjuncts  of  manner  implying  accompaniment  (of  objects,  states, 
aelions)  or  exclusion   and  omission   (of  objects). 

Ode  (bjm  kese  tuu  woii  so  sa,  he  u:ent  to   war  afiainst  thevi  with  a 

(freat  armif. 
Ne  ba  nso  wom'  (=  wo  mii)  koe,  his  son  also  went  in  it  (or,  with  litem). 
Okoe  bi,  Ite  went  likewise.  Okiih  won  li6  koe,  lie  tcent  tvith  them. 
Ne  lio  ye  fe,  na  owg  sika  ka  bo,  he  is  handsotue   and  rich  too. 

Philcm.  1!). 
Wogyee   wi'ase  tumi  kiih  lio,  they  ohtained  tvorldli/ potver  besides. 
Eyi  liliina  nkamfuaw,  oyare  nso,  heside  all  this,  he  is  also  sick.  §  134^. 
Mede  awcrebow  yi  ara  meko  gda  mu,    tvith  litis  (jrief  1  shall  (jo 

into  the  grave  (or,    7  tvill  tjo  do  ten  into  the  <jrave  mournintj). 
Ode  anigye  kese  wui,  he  died  icitlt,  <)real  joyftdness. 
Anoma   de  akgneaba  na  eiiwene  berebuw,    hji  (loiny  and  comiity  a 

hird  weaves  its  nest. 
Wgfaa  sa    triia  ofie,  they  look  (it)  so  (soil,  as  tbey  bad  it)  remained 

at  home  i.  e.  thus  thetf  ralJier  stayed  at  home. 
Wofraa  woii  a  wobii  no  m u  baa  aduaii'  to,  tliey  came  to  huy  corn 

amouy  those  that  came.    Gen.  42,  5. 
O'bnw  fain    da,  he  hlou'S  (off  wliat  is  on)  the  (jrouncl  lies  dotcn,  i.e. 

he  sleeps  on  the  hare  yround.    Yeda  ntiiw.    tve  sleep  trithoid  tire. 
Woanya  wolio  a,    to  wo  poii  mu  da,    //"  you    are   rich,    shut   your 

door  sleep ,  i.  e.  sleep  tvith  your  door  slitd. 
AVoadi  agyaw  me,  they  have  eatcit  (have  left  iite  i.  e.)  ivithout  tne. 
Obi  likwati    (likwae,   nnyaw,'    nsiane)    kokiirobeti    m  nig   pow, 

nohody  leaves  aside  (ontils,  passes  hy)  the  Ihiitnh  lies  a  knot,  i.e. 

nobody  ties  a  hnot  tvithont  the  thtutd). 
Dna  biara  iisow   nnya    lifwireii   da,    no    tree    ever    bears    tvithont 

(having  had)  flat  vers. 


140  SYNTAX.  §  238-240. 

4.  The  Adjniirl  of  Cause. 

238.  AdJKii'ls  of  cause.  Jittaehcd  to  (he  proilieatc,  answcv  to 
questions  corrosjiondiiig  to  the  local  (nu'stioiis  u'liencc'^  whilher':'  viz. 
the  (|iiestious: //-oy/i  ivhut  Cduse  or  fcasOH?  wliij?  of  what  maierial':' 
to  irhat  purpoaeY  for  ivhat?  for  u'liomY  They  denote: 

1.  a  real  cause,  being  either  (a.)  the  nakiral  cause,  the  oi'i(jin  or 
Occasion  of  an  event  in  nature  or  history,  called  the  effect,  x-esult  or 
consequence ;  or  (h.)  the  Diotire  ol"  an  action ;  or 

2.  a  Diatevial  which  is  used  up   for  obtaining  the   desigue  I   tiling; 

3.  a  po.s.sihle  cause,  or  con(lHioti\ 

4.  an  adversdlirc  cause,  or  concession; 

.'i.   a  final  cause,  or  an  inteiilion   or  purpose  (aim,   end,   design). 

t2*S9.    Circunfstan'-es  of  cause  are  expressed 

1.  by  nouns  {ov  pronouns)  with  the  poslposilions  nti  (sonn-tiuies 
introduced  by  the  auxiliary  verb  siane  or  fi  with  the  iinj»ersoual  pre- 
fix e- beginning  the  sentence),  so,  ho,  mn,  (sometimes  introduced  by 
the  auxiliary  v.   wo  or  fi);  §136,  1. 

2.  by  a  few  adrerhs,  as,  kwa,  teta,  hunu  &c.  §136,2. 

3.  by  the  conjunclion  ne  (from  the  verb  dc)  —  in  a  few  cases, 

4.  by  [co-ordinate]  auxHiarii  rerhs  or  rerhal  jilirases,  usually  con- 
nected with  comi)lements  and  cither  jjreccding  or  succeeding  the  prin- 
cipal ACrb; 

5.  by  a  noun-senlence  with  the  postposiUoh.  nti.  §2.5.),  6 «.  275,  1 
Hem.  2.  279  Hem.  2.  3. 

6.  by  adrerhial  sentences.    §  274-280. 

7.  by  co-ordinate  predicates,  not  auxiliaries,  in  contra  ted  or  connec- 
ted sentences;  see  in  §  2.')3a. 

U40.  (1 .)  Adjunds  containing  a  real  cause. 

a.  Awow  no  nti  okpyaree,  from  or  on  a'-':OU)d  of  the  '-old  nxatJier 

he  fell  si'/k. 
N'ahofwi  'ti  odi  liia,  hi/  his  dehau-Juri/  lie  /uis  he'ome  poor. 
Esiane  ne  nueyee  nti,  wgtah  no,  because  of  his  doiufis  theij  hale  him. 
Xkoasem  so  na  ok6  no  fi  bae,  out  of  the  slarerif  question  that  war  arose. 
Wokoe-  wo  so,  tJiey  quarreled  about  it. 
Oda  no  n'ciyamye  so  ase,  he  thanlcs  him  for  his  Icindness. 
^labere  no  ho,  1  am  tired  of  him. 

Wannyfi  aguadi  no  ho  mfaso  bi,  he  had  no  profit  from  the  trade. 
Owo  de  ahoy  era  w"  na  oka.  the  snake  biles  ulien  beinij  troubled. 
Ode  ahometew  dii  neho  dom,  from  despondenry  he  hilled  himself. 
Oboo  ne  nua  din  bae,  lit.  he  made  mention  of  his  brother  came,  i.  e. 

he  came  on  account  of  his  brother. 

O'ka  no  sa  kwa,  he  spoke  so  ivithout  foundation  in  realitff. 
Wotan  me  kwa,  theij  hate  me  without  reason.  Cf.  §  243  c. 


§  241-243.  SIMPLE   SENTENCES.     ADJUNCTS.  141 

h.  Nitan  nti  woki'im"  no,  thronfih  hatred  the//  killed  him. 
Aluintah  nti  o-ne  bi  iVk;'i,   out  of  pride  he  (Ujrees  ailh  iiohodi/. 
Eliii  nti  wokoliintuwe,  for  fear  thei/  hid  thcinselres    Cf.  §  25.'),  (Wr 
Woremf'i  min;tra  riinVuma  mu   nimu  onipa  biara  boin,    />//   the  deeds 

of  the  lair  there  shall  no  )nan  he  justified.  (Jioii/  .->',  j^fO  j 
Won  menoase  i-otow  nc  sukiun,  their  throat  laiafui.slies  (paiil.s,  (la/u:^) 

with  or  from  thirst. 
Wom;'ia  won  nio  ne   ko  or  due  ne  ko,  thei/  roirirahdalrd  nr  coin/olfi 

them  on  ai'count  of  the  ji()htin(). 
Munnue  ne  adviumaye,  he  pitied  on  a'^rount  of  your   irorkiia/. 

r.  Ntakiii-a  na  wode  liCi  anoma,   a  hird  is  Jcuoidi   !>//  its  fculjicrs. 
Woii  aba  na  nnVle  behfi    won,  />//  their  fruil.'<  //c  s/iotl  Icmnr  llii'iu. 
Mmara  so  na  wonani   liu  bono,   h//  the  law  is  the  kiiiurlcdi/f  of  sin. 
Rom.  S,  20. 

S41.  (2.)  Adjun'ts   denoting-  a  material. 

Oyee  kaneadua  no  nlinni   sika.    or,   ode   sika  yee  kiiin'Adua   nu   nli., 

he  wade  the  whole  i-andlesli-k  of  fjold. 
Wgde  ntama  agowagow  ye   nlinma,  jjapcr  is   naide  of  raffs. 

343.  (3.)  Adjuncts  containing-  a  condition. 

AbofrA  no  ho  n'tg  no,    gye  ne  nh  nkyen,    the  ihild  dofs  not  feil  at 

ease,  except  (when  it  i.s)  witli  it.s  mother. 
(Here  the  adjnnct  is    ellijitical,    standing    for    a  sentcmc  ^=^  gye   sr 

owg  ne  na  nkyen.) 
The  adjunct  of  condition   is  usually  expressed  l)v  adNcrbial  oi-  ellij)- 
tical  sentences,  see  §  276. 

(4.)  Adjuncts  containing  a  concesaio)!. 

Eyi  nhina  gyabaw,  gda  so  to  ho,     nothn-ilhsta])din'i  all  Ihi.'i,    he    i-'i 

still  there. 
The   adjunct    of   concession    is    usually    expressed    by   a  co-ordinate 
sentence,  see  §  278. 

34S.  (5.)  Adjnn'ts  implying  purpose  or  inleutiou-  are  chietly  ex- 
pressed by  adverbial  sentences  (§  279.  280):  but  here  we  giAe  examples 
of  such    cases 

a.  in  which  a  noun  with  a  postposition  denotes  the  thini)  to  he  oh- 
tained  by  the  action;  or 

h.  in  which  an  auxiliary  verb,  usually  with  its  complement,  shows 
the  ohject  for  which  the  action  is  intended,  towards  or  against  u'hich 
it  is  directed  (the  terminative  adjunctj ; 

c.  in  which  adverbs  show  the  absence  of  purpose. 
«.  N'anoduafi'  nti  gsom  no,  he  serves  him  for  his  duilt/  food. 

M'atade  so  na  wgbg  ntonto,  for  my  vesture  they  cast  lots, 
h.  Wgkye  me  ntama  mu  fa,  they  part  my  garments  among  them. 

Qkyee  aduah'  no  mn  maa  wgn,  he  served  out  the  food  to  them. 

Wgyee  hhomatow  mTia  gbgdamfo,  card-p)laying  was  invented  for  a 
madman. 


142  SYNTAX.  §  243. 

Yest're  wo  aniu  aliiatV),   /re  ciiiretil  ihcv  for  fjir  jtoor. 
O'ye  adwuraa  ma  ne  una,  lie  irorks  for  liis  hrolJ/rr. 
Woye  ado  yi  am  a  hena?  for  irhom  do  yon  iiniLw  I  his  lli'iiKf:' 
Move  ma  fa,  I  make  -it  (Ihal  1  maji  Inkr  ?7,  i.e.)  for  iinisctf. 
Adwuma  yi  liu  u"ni  mfaso  mm  a  mo, 
there  is  no  profd  from  this  irork  for  you. 
Nea  i'nnm  papaye  iia  gnye   no,  yyo  bone  ma  no, 

to  him  that  knoics  to  do  (jood  and  does  is  not,    lo  him  il  is  sin. 
W('insiesie  wonlio  nsic  nea  ebeba  no,  ihcy  sli all  prepare  III emsdves 

for  (or  against)  the  tilings  that  trill  come. 
Obociboa  aburow'  ano  sit;  gkomberc,  Jic  gathers  lorn   a<iainst  lite 
(experted)  time  of  scardly.  l\Iak;i  niasic,   1  liarc  lold  H  before. 
Wokasa  hyee  no  or  tiaa  no,   they  sjtoke  against  hint. 
Wanuina  abyeme,    he    has    darkened  (his  fare)    i.  o.   lie    frotnis 

up  on  me. 
Wotow  tuo   kyere   borobruc,    (hey   ftre  guns    in    honour    of  the 
governor. 

Otow'  tuo  bog  ue  nua,  he  fired  a  gun  hit  his  hrother ;  -=^ 
otow'  ne  nua  tuo,  he  shot  his  brother. 
Okaa  nttim  gnu  no  so,  he  eonjured  him. 
Yesu  b  g  g  nnipa  ogye  d  i  n   baa  asase  so, 
Jesus  came  on  earth  for  the  salvation  of  men. 
c.   Wasee  ne  sika  tera  ara  kwa,   he  spoiled  his  money  for  nothing,  to 
no  purpose. 
Hem.   ].   'i'be  terniiuati\e  adjunct  may   sometimes   iutercbango   witb 
a   simple   object,   or   witb  an   adjunct  of  cause   (§240);  e.g. 

Ne  bo   afi'nv  abye  me  =  ne  b('t   afuw  me,   ne  b(')   afuw   (wg)  me  luT,    he 
is  angry  irith  me. 
OsQ.  ma  ne  nua  =  osii  ne  niia,  osu  ne  una  bo,  he  iveeps  for  his  hrolher. 
Rem.  ^.  In  some  of  tbe  sentences  under  h.  and  Hem.  1..  e.  g.  gkyee 
aduan'  no   mii  mfia  won,  osu  ma  ne  nua,  Ave  migbt  be  inclined  to  con- 
sider 'wgn'   or  'ne  nua'   as  a  complement    of   tbe    principal    verb  (an 
indirect  ohjed,  tlaiire  or  terminatire  ohject,  o])ject  of  concern  and  direc- 
tion., cf.  §  200,  1 '•.) ,    introduced    by    tbe    auxiliary  verb   ma,    in   otber 
cases  by  sie,   bye,  tia,  —  and  not  as  an  adjunct;  but  tliis  would  not 
do  tbrougbout.  and  we  prefer  calling  every  enlargement  to  a  predicate, 
wliicli  is  not  a  necessary  complement  of  tbe  verb,  an  adjunct,  Cf. 
Maye  kyew  mamfi  no,  I  have  nnule  a  cap  for  him: 
maye  kyew  mata,   1  have  made  a  cap  for  myself. 
If  we  would  call   'mama  no'  a  dative  ohject,  introduced  by  an  auxi- 
liary,   we    cannot    apply    tbe    same    expression  to   'mafa';    again,   we 
cannot  consider  'mama  no'   as  a  principal  sentence,  only  co-ordinate 
to  tbe  preceding,  wbicli   would  be  'mede  mama  no,  1  lucre  given  it  to 
]lim^\  so  notliing  remains  but  to  designate  botb  additions  to  tbe  sen- 
tence 'maye  kyew'  as  adjuncts. 


§  244.  245.         SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     CO-(jRUINATE    PARTS.  14.3 


CHAPTER  V!. 

Subordinate  and  Co-ordinate  Parts  of  Simple  Sentences. 
Order  of  Words.    Emphasis.    Ellipsis. 

1.  Snhordinafe  Parts  of  Simple  Sentences. 

!2-14«  The  principal  parts  of  a  sentence  (the  suhje'-i  ami  the  jirr- 
d/'-<(le,  §148.155,1)  may  have  accessory  parts  subordinatf  tu  tlitMii. 

1.  In  the  predicate,  when  it  does  not  consist  of  a  verb  nnly.  tlic 
'Complements  and  the  adjunds  are  subordinate  to  the  rer^'. 

2.  'J'he  atlrihnles  are  subordinate  members  of  the  sid>')C't.  or  of  the 
lomjdement,  or  of  a  nonti  in  the  adjunct,  or  of  another  dtlr/ljitl/K^  noun. 

Rem.  The  subordination  may  be  of  the  first,  second,  third  or  fourth 
degree,  according  to  the  distance  from  the  superordinate   wm-d.   E.  g. 

;i  5  1  J  2  _  1 

Me  wura  apafo   akatua  so,   t//e  traf/es  of  nnj  waster  s  bihourers  are 
consider  aide. 

4  3  J  1  1 

Ote  Farao   abrafo  mu  panyiii   fi,    he  iras  in  the  hoH>;e  of  the  <Jiirf 

2  4  :i 

amomi  FharaoJi's  exerutioners. 

1.  Co-ordinate  Farts  of  Simple  Sentences. 

ti-^5.  1.  Two  or  more  suhjerts,  having  the  same  pri'dicate,  are 
co-Ordinale.  (The  single  nouns  or  pronouns  are  thou  nicnilu-rs  of  a 
compound  subject;  §161,  2.)  They  are  connected  l)y  the  conjunctions 
ne,  and;  ana,  anase,  or. 

In  a  succession  of  more  than  two  nK-mbers.  the  conjunction  ne  may 
be  omitted,  except  before  the  last  member. 

a.  The  combination  is  essential  for  a  gi\eu  sentence,  \\\wn  the 
predicate  referring  to  it  could  not  properlv  be  a]tplied  to  a  single 
member.    E.  g. 

Anah  ne  ani'im  ye  akrori,  four  and  fire  are  nine. 

0-ne  Yaw  ne  Kofi  se  (or  sesee),  Jbe  and  Y.and  K.  are  like  each  other. 

IvAvasi  ne  Kofi  ye  tipehfo,  Kiv.  and  K.  are  equal  in  size. 

Ye-ne  won  abom'  bio,    we  and  the?/  are  united  (reconciled)  atjain. 

h.  The  combination  is  accidental,  when  the  predicate  is  true  of  eveiy 
single  member.  In  this  case  two  (or  more)  sentences  are  contracted 
into  one.    E.  g. 

Kofi  ne  ne  nua  aba,  Koft  and  his  brother  hare  come. 
Xe  yere,   ne  mma  ne  ne  yonkonom  wo  ho, 
his  wife,  children  a)id  friends  are  there. 
(Jhscrr.    The    attributive    pronoun    is    repeated    before    every   single 
member. 


144  SYNTAX.  §  245. 

"2.  Wlion  two  or  nioro  rerhn,  not  counectod  by  eoiiiunctioiis,  have 
tlic   same  subject,   wo   distinguish  two  cases: 

(I.  I-!ssciil/al  romhliialiovs.  One  verb  is  tlie  priiicijial,  and  another 
is  an  auxiliary  verb,  supplyinir,  as  it  were,  an  achcib  of  time  or 
manner  (§  2oO.  231.  233,  3.  231.),  or  i'orming  or  iiitrodueing  a  comple- 
ment (§  205,  5.  206,  2.  3.  208.  3.  4.)  or  adjunct  (§  223.  224.  22;t.  243  7/); 
or  the  second  verb  is  supplemental,  forming  ])art  of  a  verbal  phrase 
(§110).  The  actions  expressed  by  both  verbs  are  simultaneous  and 
in  an  internal  or  inseparable  relation  or  connection.  In  this  case,  the 
auxiliary  or  supplemental  verb  is  co-ordinate  onlv  in  furm,  but  sub- 
ordinate in  sense,  whether  it  be  preceding  or  succeeding  the  princijial 
verb.    E.  g. 

Ognare  baa  mpoano,  he  Sirain  lo  Ihe  shore.    §  223. 

O'ye  adwuma  ma  ne  na,  he  /corks  for  his  inolher.    §  243  A. 

Wonni  n'anim'  n'twa  nko  asuogya  noho,    Iheii  shall  (fO  heforc  him 
(over  Ihe  lake)  unto  Ike  oilier  side.  Mai.  14,  22. 

I'ae  mu  ka  kyere  me,  lit.  splii  in  (i.  e.  rid  il  ojwii)  speak  slaiir  nn',  i.  e. 
tell  we  2)laiiihi'. 

When  the  subject  is  the  pronoun  of  the  1.  j)ers.  sing.,  it  is  prefixed 
to  every  single  verb.    E.  g. 

Meguare  mebae,  I  swam  hither.     Meye   mema  no.  1  do  it  for  him. 

Midii  n'anim'   mitwae  mekoo  agya  noho, 
1  went  orer  before  him  unto  the  other  side. 

Mepaeem'  mekti  mekyeree  no,  I  told  him  pljdnli/. 

h.  Aci-ident(d  comhiiKdioris.  Two  or  more  predicates  (verbs  with, 
or  without,  complements  or  adjuncts),  expressing  different  successive 
actions,  or  a  state  simultaneous  with  another  state  or  action,  but  hav- 
ing the  same  subject,  are  merely  joined  together  without  ronjuiirtion 
and  witliont  repealing  the  sidjjecl.  In  this  case  two  (or  more)  sentences 
are  thrown  or  rontracled  into  one,  and  the  rerhs  are  co-ordinate  in 
sense  as   well  as  in  form.    (Jf.  §  253.    E.  g. 

Osoree  guaree  srae,  Ite  arose,  washed  (and)  anointed  himself. 

Yesoree  ntem  koo  ofie,   we  arose  (/i(ickli/  (and)  went  honw. 

Otrfia  ne  ponko  so  guane,  he  scd  upon  Jiis  horse  (and)  fled. 

Sometimes  one  action  or  state  is  simultaneous  to  the  other,  in  which 
case  we  often  have  a  siiafle  rerh  in  English,  together  with  a  parli- 
cixde  or  adjective.   E.  g. 

Wote  ho  resii,  they  sit  there  weej)  =  weepinij. 

Oyare  da  mpa  so,  he  is  sirk  lies  on  the  bed,  =  he  lies  sick. 

^Yheu  the  pronoun  of  the  1.  pers.  sing,  is  the  subject,  it  is  prefixed 
to  every  single  verb  (as  in  the  case  under  «.).    E.  g. 

Mesoree  miguaree  mesrae.    jMesoree  utem  mekoo  fie. 

MetrAj\  me  ponko  so  miguane,  1  fled  on  my  liorse. 

Mete  ho  miresti.    Meyare  meda  me  mpa  so,  1  lie  (lay)  sic]:. 


§245.240.  SIMPLE    SENTENCES.     COORDINATE   PARTS.  145 

."5.   (o-onl/inilc  r(iiit))h'i//cii/s   ai-c   i'nr   tlic   most  jiart  accidciitiil  (•(nnlii- 
iiations.    P].  g'. 

Modyy  no  so   kwankyereto   no   n'awiulifo, 

ye  Juive  hecii  now  Jiis  helrai/ers  and  murderers.  Act.  7,  r)2. 
Woiitgn  no  ne  nc  yrre  no  no  ninu'i  \w.  noa   owo  iiliina, 

iheij  hIkiII  sell  him  dnd  his  wife  and  c-hildreji  and  <dl  llml  Ar  Ims. 
Wutoi'i   ne  I'i,   n'asaso  i\l:  wC'.  nneoma   iilinia, 

lie  has  sold  Jiis  house,  his  land  and  all  his  tJiin'.is. 
riomo,  ossfntial  combinations  arc  written  as  imperfect  coiiiixuiihIs  ;  o.f^-. 
Auoma  clu  akg-ne-aha  na  ei'iwcne  berebuw, 

hy  (joiwi  and  roininri  the  lard  weaves  its  nest.    ij2:;7r. 

4.  Co-ordinate  adjttwls  are  likewise  accidental  cnmbiiialious.    E.  g. 
^lerVvefw^e  no   (wg)   oCie  ne   wuram', 

J  soiaiht  him  in  the  house  and  in  the  field. 
(Jli/ue  Dwoda  no  Yaw'da  ne  Fida, 

lie  rame  on  Munda//,  llinrsda/j  and  Friday. 
Wobae  ntein   ne  lewsb,   they  came  (/uickly  and  (jladly. 

(\)-ordinatp  adjuncts  are   also  found  without  an  inter\ening  conjunc- 
tion,   especially    when   one   of  tliem   is   like   an   apposifion   to   the  ftllu'r, 
or   ex[)resscs   a   part   of  the   place  or   tinu;   denote<l    by   the   othei-.    E.  y^. 
Wohyiaa   ayeforo   wo   Kana  wg   Galilea, 
tliere  n.uis  a  marriaffe  in  Cana  of  (iaiilee. 
Miyii  wo   (rnifii)  Misri   asase  so  wg   nkoafi  mu,    J  hrdii'iJil    thee    oat 
of  the  land  of  Efiypi,  from  the  house  of  hojulatfc.    lUnl.  .',,  i'>. 
Obaa  'nera  anfiduofa,  he  came  yesterday  erenimi. 

5.  Co-ordinate  attrihutes. 

a..   Co-ordinate  adjertive  attributes,   see  §  1H8. 

Ij.   (Jo-ordiuate  ajipositions,  with  or   witliout  conjimction.     E.g-. 

Munkyia  Andronikb  ne  Yi'inia,    nrabiisfiafo   no  ni<^  yi'u'iko  jiokyerel'o 

salute  Andronic'iis  and  Jtinia,  mi/  kinsmen  ani/  nn/  fillmrjirisoners. 

itow.i^,  7.  —  §190,  3.  4. 

r.   Co-ordinate  atlrihutive  nouns  are   found  before  subjects,   conipie- 
nients,  adjuncts,  attributes.    E.  g. 

Ne  yere  ne  ne  ba   wu  ania  ne  were  aliow   se, 

liis  wife's  and  child's  death  have  (jrieved  him  mwh. 
<Jte   ne  na  nc  n'agya  asem,  he  hears  his  mother's  and  falhrr's  word, 

i.  e.  he  is  ohedient  to  father  and  mother. 
Wosiee  Yakbb   wo  Abraliatn   no   Isak  asiei, 

'Jacob  was  huried  in  tli,e  hnryiny  plare  of  Ahraham  and  Jsitai-. 
Sweden  ne  Norvvogen  bene  dih   de  Os'kar, 

tlie  name  of  the  Icing  of  Sweden  and  Norway  is  Osrar. 

.'».    Ili'iiular  Order  of  Words.    Condiinaiion  of  Differnil  ( 'lymjiliincnts, 
Adiunrlf<   and  Attrihulrs. 

t2l4».    1.   The    usual    succession   <>{'  I  he   pai-ts   of  a   seiitoiu'c^   is: 

10 


146  SYNTAX.  §  247. 

1.  .s/(/>/V'7,  2.  rcrh,  ?>.  romjdcnu'iit,  4.  iid}ini<t. 

AUrilndcs  closely  j'lin  tlio  iioiiii  to  wliicli  tln'}'  Itdoiii;',  .itlici'  prc- 
('(■(liiit;-   or  succeeding    it.     i>  IS,").  I'.K).  l'.)2. 

Rent.  1.  Ad'uni'iii  of  time  often,  and  (td'nm-ls  of  nuixc  \\  illi  the 
posfpo.sition  nti   always,  pn'rcde  (lie  suhwl. 

lifin.  2.  Aduinds  of plarc  or  tinw  sometimes  y>/-t','t7/r  till'  ronijjirtiifiil 
like   ail    attribute  in   the   possessive   case.     ( U'  §  'J'i;'),  li. 

Dadi'wa  atew   nratadem"   tokuni,   a  mid  Jiiis  torn  ii  hole  in  ntif  ronl. 

( >'di   ate   noara   soropanvii'i.   Jir   irns  iJir  liff/h  /ir/rst  lliid  snnir  i/rnr. 

'2.  ( )t'  I  ICO  ronijilenii'lds  of  the  same  \-erl),  the  ddliri'  precedes  the 
jt,is.s/i\'  iiliject.  and  the  jniss/'rr  jirecedes  the  fil  ■li'irc  (diject.  i>  'J(l.').  "idC). 
I'.iit  when  the  pnirisivi'  uliject  is  introduce, 1  liy  tlie  auxiliary  de  (()ri";i), 
it  precedes  the  princi])al  verl)  with  a  daJ/rc  ohject  as  wtdl  as  with  a 
f<i'-l/!/re  oJ/jC'-l.   E.  g. 

C)liiiaa  me  asem  hi,  or  ode  aseni  hi  hiiaa  nie,  Jie  rtinmed  me  (i  inisinr. 

Wosii  no   liene,   or:   wode  no   sii    lieiie,   fJiri/   modi'  liim   klmi. 

?>.  (-)t"  d//jrrent  adjnn'-ls,  tliat  of  nmnncr  usually  preceih's  that  of 
lil(i'-i\  and  hoth  l)rccede  that  of  lin/<\  if  the  latter  he  iidt  put  at  the 
head  of  tiie   sentence.     <  )u    the  adjunct   of  (■,//(.s/'  with  nti,   see  1.  lint/.  J. 

WosiVi  se  Wo  ho,   ilu'i/  trt'/)f  iJirrc  nmli. 

( )su  ato  ju  'ne,  it  Jins  mined  niiirh  lo-diC/. 

.M'aui  gyci   se    ''^'Q  ''o  'uera,  ]  re''oi--i'd  iliere  rrri/  nnirji   ii(-slt'rd<iii. 

Ene   ni'ani  agye  ha  se,  io-diii/   I  liare  been    ri-r//  ijhni  lirrr 
(In   this   sentence   li  a  is   rather   a   complement.) 

j']ih-i   no,   ohere   ne  k('nn   nti   ot('>o   piti    w  o   'kwanniu, 
lliiil   diiji  he  fa/iiled  on   ilie  n'o//.  jri.ni   ireniiness  ond  lininier. 

Ne  nti   mahi'i    amaue   pi  w_»dae  iiiu  'ne,    J  Jiiire  snlj'erei/  om  ni/  llinijis 
lliis  d(i/j  in  II  dreiiiu  Jicause  of  liim.    Mnl.  27,  10. 

When  the  auxiliary  verb  de  or  fa  introduces  an  adinnrl  of  noiniier 
(instiuineiit  or  accomjiaiiiuuuit),  or  of  rnii.se  (motive,  reason,  nLiferial), 
it  j)recedes  the  princijial  verb  with  its  passive  object.    §  2'.>l.n.r.  '2Hl(i.f. 

The  auxiliary  fi,  w  it ii  adjuncts  oi'  phl'-e,  usually  ])recedes,  —  but 
ihi'  auxiliarii's  wo,  ba,  k  o,  liesi,  kodii,  and  others,  wilh  iheir  adjuncts, 
alwass    succeed    the    piiiicipal    \crb    laud    its    CDiiipIeiiinils).    ij  2"2.'>.  'J2 1. 

•1.    r^nijdni.sis. 

iJ47.  Any  jiait  of  a  sentence  may  lie  maile  rnijthillif  by  placing 
it  i)ef()re  the  sentence  in  an  absolute  way,  as  it'  if  were  a  seiiteiici' 
by  itself,  and  aipplying  it  in  its  regular  place  by  a  pronoun  (wliiidi, 
liowe\('r,  is  (unitti'd  in  some   cases,   §  202,  4). 

The  w'(n(l,  which  is  thus  rendered  ]>rominent,  is  fidlowcd  either  by 
the  (ciniuiHtinn  n  ;i ,  or  by  one  or  two  of  the  cmidiatic  jiarticdes  d  e, 
mnioiii,    nko,   ara,    with   or    without    na,    or  merely  by  a  short  pause, 


§  247.  SIMPLE   SENTENCES.     EMPHASIS.  147 

iii;iik«'<l  in  writing  by  a  i-omiiia.  It  may  i-voii  lie  cxiiaiidcd  into  a 
jMOjier  sent(*nc(',  by  adding  the  words  wo  ]i  «>  yi,  or  by  premising 
the  word  eye,  il  is,  if  iras.  In  negative  sentences  en  ye,  //  is  iml, 
is  used,  and  the  verb  of"  tlie  real  }n-('dic-ati'  of  the  sentenee  t'olhiws  in 
th(!   affirmative  form.     E.  g. 

1.  The  subject  rendered   prominent. 
Meara  na  merebeye,   I  mysdf  shnU  do  it. 
Moara  mohfwe!  see  ye  (to  it)!    Miit.27,24. 

En  ye  me,   eye   woii   na  ekae,   not  7,   (l)iit)  lJn'//  lolil  if. 

(Jn' de,    wanyi  woii   aye,  lie  did  not  praise  tliem   (as   otliers   did). 

Eni)  mmom'   na  enye  kora,  that  is  eiien   iVOf.se. 

En»')  liko  ara  na  edoso,  thd  (done  is  sufficient. 

Amaii   abien'   yi  tumi   nso,   cte   sO  e.se  ;  na   won'  abrabii   na  esono  no 

kora,  the  power  of  these  two  nations  was  nearly  er/iud,  Ijut  their 

ni  a  n  n e  r  s  were  entirely  different. 
r>one  wo  ho  yi,  eno  na  esec  mail,  it  is  sin  that  spoils  a   nation. 
Enye  abopae  iiko  ne  adwuma.   not  only  diffyiny  stones  is   n'ork. 
Ase  a  mete  yi,   enye  eno  na   ehia  ;  na   adwumaye  na  ehia, 

that  I  live  is  not  necessary,  hut  to  do  work  is  ne  essary. 

2.  TIh^    rerh   is   made  prominent   by  premising  its  infinitive  form. 
Oyaw   iiko  ara  na  wote  ho  yaw,   (hey  line  in  contiimal  f/narrc/imi- 
Wawu  no,  na  own  ara   na   wawii,  hnviny  died,  he  iras  dead. 
Nnipa   nhhia   pe  Abrokyiri   ako,   na  ony?l  n;i    wonnya, 

(dl  men   n-ish,  to  yo  to  Kurope,  they  only  do  tuA  attain  to  it. 
Atade   de,   otu   na    woti'i   ho,   na   wontwiw,   as    for     a     coat    (or     any 
garment),  it  is  lirnshed,  hut  not  lieaned  (as  shoes). 

;5.   ('omplewents  made  prominent. 

a.  The  noniinatirc  rompleniod. 

Woliui  se  eye  ohene  no  neri,  they  san:  that  it  is  (he  Liny. 

Enye  ohene  no  neh,  it  is  not  (he  kiny, 

h.  The  ohjeclive  and  locative  complement.    Sec  §  2()1,  5. 

Yiye  beii  na  mmara  yi  yee?   whU  ffood  was  eff&ied  hy  these  lairs':' 

Nsu  ani  wo  ho  yi,   nea   woafa  ho,    wobsi  a,   wiuriifi   ho  bio, 

the  n)ay  yon  have  t(dcen  on  the  surface  of  the  n-afcr,  yon  do  not 

see  ayain  in  returniny. 
I'rnssif'o   mpojino  ho  na   Eoinisifo    kofaa    etoii   fi,    //     was    from    tin 

coast  of  Fnissia  tliat  (fie  Ffioenicians  fetcfied  awher. 

4.  Adjuncts  oi'  plai-e,  time,  manner,  cau.se,  made  jiromineut. 
IJabiara  si  obedn   na   wasee  ho  nneema   idiina, 

ah ilfier soever  fie  rtime,  lie  destroyed  ererythiny. 
Woii  komam"   de,    woda  so  ye  abosonsomfo, 

/;/  t/teir  fiearts  they  n-ere  still  fieathen. 
Kaii  no   nil   won  banu  yi   ye  biako, 

formerly  these  two  men  were  on  yood  terms. 
Ne  bere   so   n.i   likurofo   no   liuu   amane   pi, 

///  liis  time  I  lie  people  were  sorely  afflided. 


148  SYNTAX.  §  248. 

Enye  ohonam  aiii  iiy;\m(>s('iin  kwa  so  ii;i  niiipa  nam  Ix-iiya  I'lkwa, 
na  Awiirade  Ycsu  I'lko  so,  iia  \voii;un  iiya  iikwa,  //  /s  mil  hi/  iJK'i'c 
imliiuird  ivitrsliip  Unit  a  iiniii  ii-ill  he  snrct/,  hid  oiilii  hi/  Ihr  Liinl 
Jcsiis  (arc   in:  sarcd). 

Isilrii    iia    oiKi  (!(',   woaiiinia  11(1  V 
irlii/    didd  [Jion   iinl   ij/rr  (<nii/l/i/iiii/   hi  liini':' 

Nnipa  <>.i;'\<'   iia   Ycsu    lioo   diii    wiii. 
//   inix  for  l/ic  siih'iilioii  of  mrii  llml  rh-sns  died. 

Veil    aiiai'iiiiu   na   own'   sii,    //    /ri/.s   hi    aiir   slcud  llnil  hi'   d/ctL 

.").   Allrihnllrc  nouns  made  |)i-oiniiiciit. 

<Jl<  wjisca   na   m'  giiai'i   tew    in]i(''i'i    aliici'i', 
((   fiol  //  /.s'   irliosr  sjii'r/i  hrnih's  hio.sr  lir/rr. 

I'riii.  All  iidfrrojiol/rr  pronoiiiis^  stilis1;iiiti\c  am!  adjective,  arc 
ol'lcii  I'oiim!  ill  this  cm|(lialic  posilioii  at  tlic  licad  ol  the  scntciici',  and 
take  11  a  alter  them,  whctlicr  they  stand  in  the  |dacc  ol'  the  snhjoct, 
or  of  a  com|ih'meiit,  adjunct  or  attrihiite.  (^Ijcl'orc  tlie  \erli  lie  they  do 
not    take    na    after   them.)     E.  i:'. 

lli'-na   na    aliaV    irlio   /las   coiiie? 

(ll(''iia   niV    ivlio   is  lliis?    Eden    iiiV    irlnil  is  lliisYj 

i\i\r  hell  or  (h''i'i  (=dcchei'i)  na  wotonV   W('itoi'i  (h''i'i  V  irlnil  ih>  i/ohsiUY 

Xiii|ia   alic   na   (''wo  ho?  Jioir  iiimii/  /icrsiois  ore  lln'rcY 

W  rdii'i    ahcV    (ahc    na    wnlifi  wei'iVj   lioir   iiiiiiii/   do    i/oii   srrY 

IliMia   i;iiai'i  na  ay(''raV  (heiia  na  m''  ^ala|■|   ayi'-raV)   irlmsr  slirrj)  is  /ostY 

Elie    na    wi'ihnfinoV   (wnlifiiino   \\u    heV)   irjirrc   d/d  i/oii   srr  liiiiiY 

T).   Kl  lips  is. 

t^  BS.  A  part  ol"  a  sontonco  may  he  oil/iUnl,  w  lien  it  can  easily  he 
suj)[dieil  I'rom  the  context,  whether  it  he  mentioned  hei'ore.  or  not, 
and    in    ]iro\erl)s   (U"   sententious   and    impassioned   e\pressi(nis. 

1.  The   siihjrrl    liein;:^'   omitted,    see  ij  HlO. 

2.  'idio.  idijc.rl   hein^-   omitted,   sec  i>  "JO'J. 

;').   Tlie.   rrrJ)   may    he   omittcil   in    some   cases,   as    -- 
(1.   the    verh    ye,     in     dcscri[itions     hefore     norninntixe     conipleiinMits, 
especially    adjecti\es-    c  'j^. 

(>kura    poiiia   hi   a    (dio   ajiowajx'iw,   lir   hod  o   h'lodihni  sh'l:., 
lli':niiiro   ye    nnijia    hi    a    won  ;is(''ni    /ihanrsi'm,    woiiani    ak>ew  aky(' w, 

w('n'i  koko   atetrete,   iJiv  lliitis   were  /iro/dc  oj  soroijr  iiiomicrs,   iril/i 

si/itiiil  ri/rs,  hroad  rjicsls. 
'^J't'asccnain  a  lie  nan  ahieiV  ahieiV  niii  na  W('ilwe  won  yereiioni  ne  won 

mma,  0)i  itvo-U'heel  furriiu/cs  iJici/  drcir  Ihcir  ir/rrs  and  cJiihlrcii . 
^Von  ade   mmoho  I  lit.  ihiir  IhiiK/s  [riiiisc  uv   ntorc  lo\  ju/i/,   i.r-.  jtoor 

jx'Oji/e! 
h.  any    verh,    with    comjdemcnts ;   e.  <;•. 
Asein    nko,   nyansa   hko,    iiiollcr  (doiii\  icisihoii   ohoir,   i.  e.  l/ic  nuiKcr 

(ill   (/Hcslinii)  is  our  Ihiiui,  oiid  irisdont  (or  ////;  /•//////  jiidi/rincnl  of 

il)   is   miolhrr  Ihiiuj.     ]?rov. 


§  2i9.  250.  (simple  sentences.)  compound  sentences.       149 

4.  A  irltolc  sciilcii  X  with  the.  i'XC('|ilioii  ol'  the  last  wmd  is  mhiic- 
times   oniitlcd ;   o.  '^. 

Wnlvo,   na  kniiia!  llr.\i)   arc  (juiic  and  [sfiicc  crcrij  tlilmj  /.sj  .si/ciil,  i.e. 

inilliiiKi  has  liccn  heard  siiire. 
N;i   iniaawotwc   no  diti,  y('l'\Vo  a,  —  k(')i;i !   llic  L'i(jlilli  ddij  cainc,  ii/icii 

/re  loulicd  Old,  \irr  sair  iii)hi)d//]  at  ad!  i.e.  iiohod//  ramr 
(_)|i('in]M'in    no   r('.j»c   oto   ato   oko   no   ann,   nso  ukwa,   lire  CHijicior  dis/.- 
rcd  to  l'(dl  ill.  Uic  Ixdilc,  bid  \iic  soiifjid,  d.\  in   r,ui(. 
On   dalii,   no,    wet!  §140,0. 

f).   Kidirc  scidcnccs  too  arc  Icl'i   out;  e.g. 

\V<')   dc',   gyc  so   vvoto!    a.s  for  llice,   [7  sludt  nut  he.  >ialisjiril\  crcjd 

I J  1. 1)  a  did 
E'l)a   s;i   d;i   nso   a,   [aniniaj   g-yc  so   Fians   daiV   n'.inian    no    niu    )n  de 

nia  Napoleon,    «.v  oflcii  as  this  cainc  to  pass,    \iL  did  not  caiiic  to 

paxs]  eccepl  Frainis  ceded  soit/e  pari  of  his  coitidries  to  Xajiv/ron. 
Anfwu   ne   wi'i — ,   na   d'anini   wi'i,    ahaiuc    and  death,    \if    J    had    to 

cJioose  hi'tireeii  them.]  then  \lsh(iidd saij]  death  is  less  Ixal.  (U'. i^  l'.)'.l,5. 
S(!   yeaniFa   alxxLi   nlia!     Mat.JG,7. 

G.  Sid>ordiiiatc  seidewes  arc  in  some  cases  shortened  and  roi/Ira  - 
led  witli  tlieir  jn-incipal  one  l>y  the  omission  of  their  \crli  (with  its 
(•oni|dcnient )   am!   of  other   parts   or   |iartieh's.     (!f  i^  'JCi'.l. 

4)a  sc  'ne   Yaw  y((besiin',  this   Tliarsday  week  ive  shall  start. 
Da  se   'ne  Yaw,   lit.   daif  like  to-day  Tliitrsfday).  may  lie  said  to  be 
shortenetl   from    da   a   etc   se   'ne  Yavvda  yi   [te],   or   the   like, 
('f.    Da  se  'ne  nti    na  woaye  bowerew.    (Prov.) 


SECTlUiN  il.     CUMl'OUND  SENTENCES. 


CHAPTER  I. 
Co-ordinate  Sentences. 

!2ltl.  A  roiii/iomal  seideii'-e  (^If).'),  2rt)  may  contain  two  or  more 
priii'ijial  seideines  eo-ordiiaite  with  each  other,  the  connexion  of  which 
is  either  1.  rojmlidire,  or  2.  adversative^  w  :\.  rausidine  (illatire),  and 
is  indiiatcd  by  conjunctions  and  conjunctive  adver'is  or  phrases,  or 
lies  only   in   the  sense. 

1.    Copulalire  Co-ordination. 
^tiO.     In   ropulalire  roinhiitalions,    a    second   assertion   is   added  to 
the  first,  so  as  to  give  greater   extent  of  meaning  to  the  whole. 


150  SYNTAX-  §  250. 

'I'lic  (•(iinicclcil  s(,'iiti'iu-('fH  nrc  cillicr  n['  ct/iKil  v.-iIih'  or  iiii|i()i-lam'c, 
siiiiiillaiicoiis  or  witliuut  r(\ii,'ar(l  to  liiiu'"yl,  or  coiilaiii  a  (iiun/al/oii ''), 
or  ('Njircss  ;i  siiCcessMii  in  spacci  or  tiuKMJ,  or  .state  a  parl/l/oii  '0, 
or  llio  added  sentence  contains  an  c vphinalioii  oi'  tlie  iircccdini;-  one, 
or  of  one  of  its  parts';^. 
(I.   Akoko  f\Ve   aberewd,  na  aberewa  fwe  ukoko, 

(he  hen  cdfcs  for  the  {old)  a'omait  aitd  Ihc  ivoiiiait  earea  for  lite  hen. 
'J'ekreuiu   na  ekum   iiipa,   iia  tekrema   na  egya  iiijia, 

Ihe  lomjue  Ic/'lls  {a  man)  and  the  lonjiiie  saves  (men). 
Asi'kre  ye  frtinfreni,   aduru  ye  nwene,  na  anka    ye   nyinyanyinya, 

snijar  is  sweet,  medkine  is  hitter,  and  a  Jinn:  is  sour. 
MiVama   kese   boe,  na  epo  boo  asorokye, 

a  (jreal  wind  hieiv,  and  the  sea  r((st  hilhaes. 
(Jj>-yaw' nie,   na  manha  no  bio,   }ie  left  ine  and  I  san-  hint  no  n/ore. 
Abram  traa   Kanaaii,  na  Lot   koti-aa   Sodom, 

Ahrani  dwelled  in  Canaan  and  Lot  went  and.  divettrd  at  SodoiiL 
()nyank6j)6n  anyan  Yesii,    iianso    onani    iie  ti'inii   so   brnyaii  yeii    bi, 
(ioil  hiis  raised  Jesus,  and  will  also  raise  ns  ht/  his  /lo/rcr. 
h.    Nsf'ini   brode   nko,   sfun  kwadi'i  bi, 

do  not  (rnli)  plant  plantains,  hut  jilanl  hanajais  tuo. 
AA^xiihye   bo   nko,  na   waye  nso, 

Jte  did  not  onlij  give  a  jiromise,  hid  kept  it  also. 
Nno   wo  yoiikonom   nko,  na   do    wo  atamfo   nso, 
tore  not  onlij  thy  friends,  hni  lore  also  tlnj  enemies. 

c.  NiiwontolV)   di  kan,   asankiibofo  di  akyiri,  th,e  sinjers  (/o  heforr,  the 

planers  on  instruments  follow  after.    Ps.  (!S,  25.   ' 
\\\\\   no   wot\ve   nianso;   afei   woaye   biako, 
formerlji  they  were  at  rariance,  nou.'  the//  luiree. 

d.  Mnn'ta  bebr»;  te  asase   so,   ebinoni   nso   te   nsiim", 

manji  animals  live  on   land,  some  also  lire  in  the  water. 
Ebinoni   reborn'   se',   na  afoforo   reborn'   se, 

son/c  cried  one  tlmuj  and  some  another. 
C.    AilnaiV  no  ye   niovnono,    wonuoae, 

this  food  is  rate,  it  lias  not  been  Innleil. 
Asem   te  se  anonia:   enkye  tu,  a   word  is  liL-.e  a   btrd:  /I  jlies  awa// 

soon  (ronws  oat  of  sight  or  ntemorip. 
Agya  biakd  na  yew'o,   one   Nyaiikupoii. 

we  have  one  Father,  that  is  (iod. 
Mrnoa  bi   pnw    wesaw,  ebi  ne  :   yonia,   nanlwi,    o^uaii,    sojn<'    In.'a.sts 

ehefo  the  cud,  as,  the  camel,  the  coir,  the  shi'cp,  <ind  other's. 

1'.  When  a  suri-ession  of  events  falls  in  tbe  fiilnre  lime,   we  frc(|mMitly 
iind   only    the  first  predicate    in*the   future,    or    also   in   (he  present   or 
proifressire,   and   th,e   swceedin;!  }>redi'ates    in    the    ronsc-nlive    form., 
whereby    they    appear    rather    as   subordinate    tlian    as   coordinate   srn 
tenees.     (!f.  '258,  5  Eem.  27i»,  2.  2S(>,  1  />. 

AVorcko  Nkran   'ne,  na  okyena   woas.iii    ak<">    Delia, 
the//  are  (joing  to  Akra  to-da/j,  and  will  return  to  J'jlmina  lo-n/orrow. 


§  251.  CO-ORDINATE    SENTENCES.  151 

Ode  iDiiiaiitrii  im  lic^viiia  lie  iiilVi,    iia  i>i\r  iiiji.hk)  im  au'\  iiia    ln'iikuiii. 

Mni.  ':>.'>,  :i:i. 

(hii'na  lia  no  liclii'i  aiiiaiK'  |ii.  iia  iiijiaii}  imlVi  m";  asi'ilVi  iii|raiiyiM  in- 
kyi'irwlo  in>  apa  lU)  ua  wnaUuiii  im,  iia  d.i  a  rto  so  iiiiaiiSM  in)  wa- 
u\{u\.  Lnk.  !K  22.  -if.  ]<S,  ^l-:!3.  cl'  Mat.  16,  21.17,  22. 23.  20,18.1!). 
.\Lirk.  8,  31.  'J,  31.  10,  33.  31. 

2.    Advcrsiilii'^  Co-ordiiialioii. 

***>tm    111  (tdi'Ci'salirc  lontli/mdiviiH  a  si'euud  assertion  is  jiul   ///  ojtpi/- 
siiioH   to   tlic  lii-Ht,   cither   ri(\i;;ativini]:;  it"),    or   Icavins;    oiu'    of    tin'    two 
assertions   to   be.   accepted  and  tlie  otlnr  to  be,  nej;'.itive  I  '').    uv   l;•l•antin_^■ 
tlic   first,   bnt   presentinii'   a   limitation 'J   or   a    contrast'^)   to   it. 
a.  Wanko  Akyem,   na   osai'i   l>a;\   Nkran, 

he  did  not  ijo  la  AkoiK  I'ld  rdunicd  to  Akra. 
Nye   iiya,   na  tu   inniirika  iiteinntcni,   he  not  slotr,   liiil  run   fast. 
jMenipc   wo   bone,   na   meye  wo   yiye, 

/  ilo  not  wish  to  hnrl  //on.  hitl  J  sholl  do  //on  (luod. 
Wansiw'  no   kwai'i,   na   ninioni'   ol)oaa  no, 
he  did  not  hinder  him,  hi((  crrn  helped  hiin. 
h.  Ko   ne  nky'Mi,   anase   kyerew  no    nhonia, 
(10  to  him,  or  trrile  him  o,  letter. 
F\Ve   ki'iru   no  yiye,  anye  sa   a,   ebetn, 
(i.lleud  well  to  this  wound,   else  it  irill  ulrerate. 
Waila,   anase   wafi  adi,  he  sleeps  or  has  (/one  oaf. 
e.  Ey«_'  I'e,   iifi'  tMiy<j  aiubere,   //  i.s  fine,   hut  e  ccites  no  desire. 
Wanyin,  na  onnya    int'mv"   dwen   e, 

he  is  old,  hat  still  Jkis  no  (irei/  hairs  i/et. 
i\[ede.  nio   de,   na   menne   mo  iibhni,   1  mean   //on,   hnf  not  all  of  ifoa. 
]\IaiVe  no   de,    na   mamtVe   mo   nirin.i, 
/  fiare  railed  him,  hut  not  all  of  i/on. 
d.  WoatVe  nnipa   bebie,   na  kakni    bi  na  woa])aw  won.   Mat.  20,  10. 
AbotVa  bo   nwaw,   na  oinin('i   akyekyere, 

a  rJtild  hreaks  a  snail,  hat  not  a  tortoise. 
Aso  bi   abieiV,    na  entc  nseni   abieiV,   (imtn's)   ears  are  l/i'o,   tail  iJ/e/j 

donl  hear  tieo    teord.s  (the   same   word    in   two  dit'fei-ent    ways). 
'I'.ie  mu  sc'  ye  i'ere,   nso   eye  aiiodwo,    '^Speal:  it  out  frerl//  (tell  /t 
/dainl/i)"'  eauses  sliame,  hat  hr in/is  ease  of  mind. 
Hem.  1.    'JMiere  arc    sentences    which    may   as   well   be    reckoned   to 
§  L'.')0,   as  to  i<  251.     E.  g. 

Ilalnd   yee   o^nantVvefo,   na    Rain   (nso)   ye{;   oknafVt,   Ahel  auis  a  kee- 
jier  of  slieep,  and  (or  hat)   Cain   a'as  a  tiUer  of  the  ifronnd. 
Hen/.  2.    In  sentences  like  the  following',   tlie  second  contains  a  raii.se. 
Anka   mebac  akye   (or   main   ha   dedaw),   na    osi'i   no   nti  amnia  nian- 
!iya  ntein,    /  should  he  here  (or  .sliould  hare  arrived)    Ion;/  .s//^  r'. 
hut  on  a -count  of  the  rain   1  /r^.s  delaijed. 
An  ka  introduces  an  event  not  real,  bnt  only  imaginary;   cf.  §  141,8. 
27G,  5.    'I'he  second  sentence  is  adversative  to  the  first,  giving  the  rea- 
son for  the  nou-reality   of  the  event  mentioned  thereiu.    Cf.  §  252. 


152  SYNTAX.  §  252.  253. 

.">.    C<in^al/rc  (Uid  I/lidirc  Co-onlinalioii. 

t£f>!^.  Ill  '(titsalirc  'onth/iKil/ons,  oiw  aciitciu-i;  |L;i\c.s  llic,  Joijical 
reason  m-  riiiisc.  and  llic  oilier  tlu-  /iifcrcihcc  (Jotlirid  i-uii'-ltLsioii)  ur 
rcsnil  (f/jro!  ur  ronsct/iicii  r).  Wlii'u  tlic  sccoiid  .sciiLriicr  CNprL'bsi's 
X\\v  rcasdii  or  cause"),  it  has  llioeoiij.  iia,  and  wlieii  it  expresses  the 
iui'ereiice.  or  result  '''),  it  has  the  words  u  a  eiili,  cyi  uti,  eiio  nti, 
eue  se,  before  it  E.g. 
a.  Nko  turoiiT,   iia  tarn'  atow, 

do  not  (JO  iiilo  the  fiardcii,  for  lite  (/ronnd  is  trcl. 
Asase   no   ye,   iia   eba  adiiaiV   pi, 

this  land  is  jood,  for  il  jirodwcs  iini  h  food. 
Nliyira  nc  nniioboroluinufVi ;   ua    wi'u'i    iia    wobehii  wnii    nniedMi. 
h/cs.sed  are  (he  mcrcifal:  for  l/u'i/  sliaJl  ohlain  nn-r-t/, 
3Ie  (hun   no   do  wo   so;    na  me  tuini    \vie   pe   ye    wo   iiierew    nui, 
»'//  fji'((''c  is  snfficieut  for  lJi.ee:    for  mi)   slrciuilli  is  made  per f el 
ill  irrakiii'ss.    2  Cor.  12,  !i. 
^I('iiiu"n;ida   inobo  ;   Onyanie   nrnia    wonsi  no   at  wet  we, 

III',  not  deceived;  Grod  is  not  niodccd.    (jral.G,7. 
Item.    1.    The   cause  is   more  t're([uently   ex[)ressed,   in    the  same  sue- 
cession,   by  cf'ise,   introducing-  a  subordinate   seiit<'nce.     i^  27.'),  2. 
I).  Aliene   ne   mpanyindo   tumi   ti   Nyahkopiu'i:    enti  etwa  se  mt'ibere  mo 
ho   aso  bye.  won  ase.     liom.  IS.  '). 
Oiii'pa  nti  na   woyee   bomeda;   na  enti   onipa  ba  no  ye  homeda    nso 
wura,  tlie  sahtiath   was  made  for  man;  tJiercfore  tin:  Sun  of -man 
is  Lord,  also  of  lire  sahhath.    Marli.  .2, 28. 
Muirnim"   don  ko   a   ni(')  wura   beba;  enti   ni(')h\Ven!   ifoii  di>   not  Jcnoa: 

tvli.at  hour  ijour  master  will  ronie:  tJiereforc  iiudrh! 
Item.  2.    '\\\^^   ranse   is   also   expressed    (in   the  same  succession)  by   a 
subordinate  sentence  ha\  iug  nti  for   its  last   woial.    Vj.  ii;. 

(>Se   or  csianc  se  oi'   efise)  mi'innini    dou   ko  a   obeba   nti,   nn'iiiweh  ! 
her.ause  {o\:  as)  you  do  not  know  what  hour  he  u-ill  rome.   watrh  ! 
8ee  i?  275,  1 .        ' 

4.   Co)draction  and  Abhreviation  of'  Ci-ordinate  Senten'-es. 

S5S.  1.  Wlicn  two  co-ordinate  sentences  have  either  tlu'  same 
suhjecl,  or  the  same  predir'ate,  or  the  same  roinplement,  or  the  same 
adjunrt,  tlie  parts  common  to  both  sentences  are  not  e.xjiressed  twice, 
and  the  two  sentences  are  conlra-ted  into  one,  and  regarded  as  a 
simjde  sinitence  with  a  compound  suhjcd  or  predicate  or  'omplement 
or  ad'jun-t,  consisting  oi'  co-ordinate  members.   Examples  sec  §  21,'),  1-;'). 

When  such  co-ordinate  members  consist  of  nouns  or  pronouns,  they 
are  connected  by  the  conjunction  ne  or  an  ase;  wdieii  consisting  of, 
or   introduced   by  verbs,   no   conjunction    is  used. 

2.  'i'his  a[)plies  to  copulative  seulenre.s-  to  adre.rsatirc  sentences^ 
only  when  two  subjects  or  complements  connected  Iiy  anase  have  a 
common  verb.    E.  g. 


§  25o'''-  CO-OKDINATK    SKNTENCIOS.  lOc 


Kwaisi  ;iii;i.s(j   Kol'i   iiiiiicra,    Kirasi  ijr   Kofi  >ih,all  ruiitc. 

Wafn   o<;_naiil('ii    anasr   ahrrckyi  V   ]i/iH  lie   (xjiUllil   <i  s/ici'/i  or  a  (Jddl  Y 

11(111.  !n  a  srcoiid  <-oj)iil(ilirc  sentence,  in  wliicli  tlie  |Friniiriin,  unl 
in  an  inlrcrsultrc  senlence,  in  wliicli  also  llie  veil)  can  lie  nnnlleil  in 
En;:,li.sli,   hotli    must    he   ex  pressed    in    Tslii;   e.  n'. 

Ivwasi  bae,  iin  oUn   Itiu,  K.ifi(.si  camc^  hid  ivciil  (iti'o//  (Ojiuit. 

Menipc  ne  uiui,   iia  nicpg   Kot'i, 
/  limit  ii'iuit  his  hrotlicr,    hiil  (I  iruidj   Kofi  liinmclf. 

,M;uiya  ode,  iia  niaiinya   ahiirow',    /  liiirc  (lot   ijan/.,  hiil   iin   rm-n. 

.'!.  All  advei'Sldivc  sentence;  may  lie  nhhrcr/'alcd,  wlien  only  a  siniile 
part  in  it,  cither  the  ,snhjc-l,  or  an  ohjcrf  or  an  iillr/'/iiilr,  is  o|i|)o>ed 
to  iIh'  eorres])oMding  part  of  iIh;  precedinj^  sentence.  'Die  \itIi  and 
oilier  parts  common  to  Iiutli  sentences,  arc  then  not  rejicaled:  Inil  that 
part  oi  tlic  second  sentence,  wliich  is  put  in  contrast  to  a  |»art  of  the 
lirst,  is  mentioned  alone,  (or  with  such  wonls  as  necessarily  iMdoiiL:  lo 
il),    iiitrodiiced   hy   eye   or   cnyc.     I'j.  ,ic. 

Knye   me  na  mekac,   na  eye    wo,   not   1  tmid  il,   hill  Ihoii  [saii/sl  il). 

Kiiyc   ne  horn''    iiti   na   owi'u,   na  eye  yen  bone  ntia, 
iiol  on  aisronnt  of  liis  oicii  ains  hi)  died,  hat  for  our  s/ns. 

V('mi  na  woasunia  yen,   na  enye   mo,   we  Jkire  heeil  ai'iil,   iml  //on. 

Obarima  hi  wu  a,  ne  wol'asewa  na  odi  n'i'uU'*,  enye  ne  innia,  irltrii 
a  iiuiii  dics^  hi.s  neplieir  inlierils  his  i/ouds,  not  his  children 

Okwan  ware  a.  woih^  won  ii/ui  na  ('tAva,  na  enye  alionua  {in\  na 
wonne  ali.),  //'  a  iriiij  is  /oiii/,  il  is  shurlriird  hi/  l/ir  feel,  mil  h// 
ail   lie. 

I.  A  co-ordinate  sentence  I'Xprcssing  a  I'liase  cannot  be  ablire\ialed  : 
bul  the,  cause  can  be  expressed  by  a  subordinate  sentence,  which  may 
be    abbrexiated   into   a   mere   adjunct.     See  § '27').  'J40,  1 /;. 

^i>J5**  In  §  'i-lT), 'Jr^  we  spoke  of  simph;  sentences  in  wliich  two 
(or  three)  verbs  are  eo-ordiiiiile  in  form  like  tliose  in  the  contiacti'(| 
S(!nt,euce„s  of  §245,2/;.,  yet  only  one  of  those  verbs  is  the  jiriiii/Hil 
verlt,  and  the  otlier,  or  also  the  third,  an  ait /.'iliuri/,  is  sidinrdiinile 
ui  meaniiif/,  forminL,^  or  introducing  soiiu;  complement  m-  adjunct  to 
the  jtiincipal  \crb.  In  a  similar  way,  .snhordiildle  IhoiKilds,  ior  the 
e.\[n'essioii  of  wliicli,  in  Kiiiilish,  stiliordinate  sentences  or  jiarticiples 
are  used,  are  often  ioiind  expressed  in  l/ic  conciser  form  of  ru-ordi- 
naliiin,  either  1.  in  a  roiilra  -led  sentence,  when  the  snl)jecl  is  expressed 
only  once;  or  2.  in  a  'Off/jjound  seulcnee  with  the  cn-ordinalive  con 
junction  na,  e^jiecially  when  there  are  different  subjects.  'Ibis  way 
of  expression  is  found  in  many  proverbs,  seldom  with  at'iii  iiiati\-e,  but 
very  frequently  with  neuati\<'  predicati's.  'riiouu'h  (he  form  id'  the 
two  jn'cdicates  be  the  same,  their  mutual  relaliuii,  uvihv.Uxjialform 
of  the  thouf/hts  expressed  by  them,  is  different,  as  the  following  examples 
will   show. 


ir>4  SYNTAX.  §253. 

A.   Sfiiti'iKM's    witli    ;irtiriii;itiv('    prcilicalcs,    1.    coiil  raclcd,    "i.    ('(1111111)1111(1 

1.  Eliiii  hiitani  liia 'jiaiii,  irhcn  the  Irddcr  /.s  ///  tcaiil  (of  lood  Siv.), 
his  ccirricr  (lured  person  who  aceoiiiiiauie.s  liiiii  earryiii;^,-  liis  g-oods) 
is  it  too.  'i  he  first  predicate,  is  eijual  to  an  adncrbidt  sciitc)i('C  of  liiHc 
{§  2(;2,  1),  or  of  Jiiainicr  (coiHjntrisuii,  i>  -()•'),  or  of  rau.sc,  (either  veal 
ranse  or  ronditioii,  §  275.  270,  1). 

l.)na  bata  'bo  ye  otna-na,  a  pie'C  of  iVood  ff/iii;!  rtusc  to  o  stone,  is 
difl'iridt  to  he  eni.  The  1st  \)ycA.  —  an  odr.  seiit.  of  time  or  condition 
§27(1.270='):  dua  bata  bo  a,  ey(_'  otwa-na:  or  =  an  ad'ertire  sent. 
(§258,2):   (hia  a   ebata   bo  ye   ot\va-n;"i. 

2.  Oiiipa  nam  ua  osiaue  ann'ia,  irJii/st  a  man  wolks,  lie  walks  In/  the 
side  of  a  pit,  i.e.  /,s  aliecuj.s  near  the  (if are.  'J'he  1st  pred.  :— an 
adr.  sent,  of  time;  §  202.  20:3. 

.Moniono  tew  11a  i;-uaniuian  tew,  fresli  (leares)  fall  off  ami  dn/  {ones) 
faff  off,  i.e.  fresh  feares  faff  off  as-  n'eff  as  dry  leaves.  (Jnc  of  tin- 
two  prcdit'atcs  is  eipial  t(_>  an  adv.  sent,  of  nainner  (coniparison);  §  20S. 

J'>.    Sentences   with    negati\ c   predicates,    1.   contracted,    2.    compound. 

1.  \sat(''a\va  n"y(''  p(ino-n;1  n"y('"  tene-n;1  (Ak.,  r^  2.  nsat('a  nye  pono  n.V 
nso  vnyr  t(''e-na,  Akji.),  a  fimjer  is  not  dif/lnit  to  feral  (and)  not  dif- 
firnft  to  strefrli  unt,  i.  e.  a  fnujer  nmy  he  as  easily  strclehcd  as  hent. 
<  hie  of  the  two  predd.  =  an  adv.  sent,  of  manner  (romjiarison);  §  208. 

<  >bi  nyo  yiye  niiya  bone,  (lit.)  one  does  not  (jood  does  not  receive  evil; 
the  1st  prcd.  =  an  aelj.  sent.  (§258,5):  obi  a  oyii  yiye  nnya  hone, 
one  doiny  (/ood  does  tad  receive  evil;  or  --^  an  adv.  sent,  of  time  or 
rond/litm  (§27(ri)."  obi  ye  yiye  a,  oiinya  bone,  n:hen  or  if  one  does 
yood,  he  is  not  ref/uiled  with  evil;  or  the  2d  [ired.  -^^  an  adv.  sent. 
oj  cause  {purpose,  §27'J,  la.):  obi  nyM- yiye  «(_>  obenya  b(uie,  noliody 
does  yood  that  he  may  ohtain  evil. 

2.  Ak(Ki  niii  awn  na  wohknm  owiira,  if  (i  sluve  coniniits  a  n/urder,  the 
nnister  is  not  killed  (for  it).   'J'he  1st  pred.  =  an  adv.  sent,  ui'  condition. 

Obi   nto  akokonini  na   (or,    mma)    onimoh    obi    aknra,    nohodif  hnys  a 

lork  that  he  nnjy  cnac  at  anotJier  man's  villatfe.    The   2d   pred.  --_=  an 

ailv.  seid.  of  jnirjxise;  §  27'.t,  1  h.  (§  271,  1  r.) 
(y.    Fur   the  sake  of  comparison   we  add   the  followinp'  pro^(■rbs  as  fur 

tiler  examjiles  with  negative   predicates. 
1.    ( M)i   mfa  aberekyi    nto   gnanten   In^    nohody   ronipares   a   (yont    auth 

a   sheep,    'i'lie   1st  pred.  —^  a  direct  ohjecf -^  §  205,  5.  /t'c///. 
(Jbi   mniu   mma  obi,   nohody  is  salisfn'd  for  anolhcr.    Tiie   2d    pred.  r  — 

an   indirect  ohiec.t,   §2(»0,  .'!.,   or   rather  a  Irrna'natirr  adinnci,   §2  I."!  A. 

<  M)i  iihn  nipa  dakoro  nse  no  se :  woal'oii,  nof/od>/  scriii'l  (m',  hav/ini 
seen)  a  nnin  one  day  (for  the  first  lime),  says  to  him  (mi  the  same 
day):  you  have  he -una:  lean.  The  1st  pred.  ^^  an  adinncl  of  linn: 
(with    a    r(da(ive   sent.)   or   an    adv.   sent,    of  tinny,    §  220,  1 .  2()2,  1. 

(Mii    niiintaw    mnio  waw.   noho(fi/  conyhs  si'c.retli/.     The   1st  pred.        an 

ad'oin  t  iif  manner;  §  2."].'),  :5.  2.')l,o. 
(  Mii    mi'a   lie  naii    abich    nsnsuw    asn,     nohody    measures    (tiie    depth   of) 

a    water    leith    hoth    leys.    The    1st    pred.  ^^  an    adjunct   of    n/anner 

(nicans);  §  2o7«. 


§  254.  COMPOUND    SENTENCES.  155 

()l)i  iiHiisiiw  soiio  y;uii  iii  iin'i  aliabaii  ,  iiijJjodt/  ji/wks  n  It.'iif  iiii:asnnii<i 
mi  c/i ji/idiils  hfllji,  i.  e.  reflc.linu  irhui  ivill  sdUsfi/  an  clej/lmnl.  'I'lic 
l.st  pi-(!(l.  ^=  (((Ijitii'l  (if  inanncr  (acco)npuni//ii(/  circuiiisluncc);  i> 'J."i7''. 

( )l)i  I'ikwati  kokurolx^ti  inmo  pow.  Dna  biara  iisow  iiiiya  I'llVvirci'i  da. 
^  2.">7';.    The   1st  or  the  '2(1  incd.  ^=  i\n  adjiiiirl  ()f  n/diiiicr  (ccrliisfnii). 

()l)i  iinnua  ii'aiio  luii  fo,  iiohudij  slials  ]i?s  woaili  so  tlial  (in  ciniscfjiiciicc 
of  it)  he  ironld  ajijiear  as  (iniltij. 

<  )l)i  nuidi  uiui  iicho,  iiohodi/  cats  -SO  tliat  Jie  repenls  (of  it).  'V\\v  l'iI 
l»r(!(l.  =  an  adi\  sciii.  of  manner  (■onscqacn :v) ;  §  27;5,  \a. 

Obi  iihil  'bi  kwaberaii    iiliiiruw   nsi,   nohudi/  ianij)S  (ivilli,  jo;/,  ov  f  i  a/Is) 

on,   seeimj   anollier  man's  slroiui  slave.    I'lic.  1st  pred.  =  an  aduuhl 

or  adv.  sent,  of  cause  {moUvc);  §  2-iu6.  255,  (la.  275,1.2. 
Obi    iitii   nnncre   nsic   siw   so,   §276*^,2.    with    a    second  exainiih'.     'I  Ik 

1st    jtn^d.  ^- an   adv.  .sent,  of  condition. 
(  )lii    0}  i   nunusii   infa   rnniusu,   noltodi)  removes   woe  in  order  to  ijet  not;. 

'I'bc  2il  [ncd.  —  an  adr.  sent,  of  cansc  {purj)Ose)\  i^  27'.t,  \a. 
()bi    nlulii  anouia   nkokyere  opanyii'i,  §  25S,  5. 

The.  2d  pred.  ^=  an  adjective  sentence.    Cf.  also  §  25s,  .'5.  4. 
2.   Obi   nipra  na   obi  iisesaw,   §  27G'i  with   a  seeoml   example. 

'I'he    1st   j)rcd.  i^  an   adv.  .sent,  of  lime  or  roudition. 
()bi    ritwM    poina    na   cnscn  no   (tent.ei'i),   nohudi/  cats   a  si/,  h'  loii'jer  Hia ii 

himself.    '1  he  2d  pred.  -    an  adjective  seiilenic. 
Obi  nlo  ako;i    na   onsen    ne  wura,    noliodij  limis   a    shin-  thai  hr  snr/ias 

ses  his  master,  i.e.  Uad  he  mi'iht  rale  over  him  ( --  an   cNphinaliini 

(o  the  preceding   proverb). 

<  )bi    nhye   kontroint'i   na  onni   sun   (osoi'i   aba.  nsron),    nohody    fortes  a 
ihiinjian:je,  to  eat  soiai  (a  certain  f'rnit,   which  he   will   m-ver  eat).    The 
2d  pred.     -an   adverbial  scnleii'-e  of  cause  {purpose),  §2711,  1  A.     In 
slead    oi'    the   conj.   ii;i,   tiic   verb   ni  ni  a   inij^lit   bo   nscd,    especially   in 
the  Akeni    dialect'.    Of.  i?  271,  l--. 


CHAPTER  11. 
Subordinate  Sentences 

!!i»>l»  Sidxird/iKiU  sinliiii.s  t'oim  parts  o(  tlic  jirincipal  scntrnci 
witli  uliicli  tliry  arr  ciiiiipodiidcil  into  iWH'  '(iiiiple  i,  snih'n  ci^  !.'>.'>,  "_') 
i.e.  they  stand  in  the  place  of  a  snbjcct,  or  complement,  uiad|iMi(l 
or  attribute.  '1  here  are  three  kinds  of  subordinate  sentences:  1.  tin 
nonn-srnten  ■('.   '-.   the  adwlivc  .srnlen-e.  .'5.   the  ddrerhial  senlcn  e. 

Jinn,  Sulionlinatc  sentmccs  ai-c,  l»esidfb  the  connective  particlrj 
nsi'd  willi  llicm,  distin^'uishcd  from  principal  sentences  by  their  /(/;/(■ 
low  loui's  Ix'inii'  frecpu'nlly  exchani;cd  with  hinli  tones  at  the  begin 
ning,   and    low    (»r   iiiuh   tunes,    with   middle   tones   at   the   end. 


3  5C  SYNTAX.  §255. 

1.   Noni>  Sciilciijcs. 

tifi^.  A  mi/iii-scii/cii c  is  ('(|ni\al('nl  (u  ;iii  alp.s(r;ict  ihmiii,  aii'l  .stands 
Inr   a   snhjc'i.   or   loiiipliniiciil,    or   dllrihiilc. 

1.  A  int/iii-sciilciii'C  staiidiiii:,-  in  tlic  [ilacc  <>['  'a  siiliji'il,  cillici-  [iici'c- 
<lcs  tlir  ]irc(li(.'atr  nt' tlic  [n-ini-i|ial  scnlciifc.  as  the  subject  usiiall\-  (l(i(s<'^ 
or  (lie  sultjcct  i.s  indicatt'd  liy  tin-  ](ronnun  c  ,  pri'iixcd  tn  ihc  \.tI»  of 
the  |irinc-i|ial  sciitrnec,  ami  its  statiMiicnt  in  a  sentcucc  liiUows  hrliind, 
licini:-  inti-ddiK'cd  hy  tlic  cnnjunction  so,  iVoni  sc,  lo  ^■id/l'),  <>r  liy 
St-  or  scnca,  from  se.  la  he  ((like)  (i^lll.)  lu  tlic  latter  rase,  tin' 
noun  sentence   may   also   precede   tlie   jnedicate ''j. 

'(.  I'ae  nii'i  St'  ye  fere,  cid  (/I)  open  siii/  i.  e.  open  ronfess/nn  '-.//(Ni'n  slniii/e. 
Ko   \\i'<  kur('iin"   uyy  gyaw,    (fo   hilo  j/oiir   (oirn)  ruiiiiln/,   /s   no  /iisnll. 
Soni    \V(dio   n'yc   akoa,   serre  Ihi/seff  in  no!  slureri/. 
b.  Eye  se  woaha,  //  i^  well  llial  ijoa  are  '■oine. 

Kt\Vu  se  \v('iko,  if  is  ne'esudrij  l/iat  i/oii  no  i.  e.   //on  nnisl  ijo. 
Eyee.  no  fe  se  obcye  adwi'ima   no,  //  pleased  him   llial  he  slionhl  (hi 

thai  icuik,  i.  0.  he  liked  lo  do  thai,  he  did  thai   /rorh  nhidlf/. 
Ensc  alicne  sc  wobcuom   nsa,   il  is   nol  for  kiiajs  lo   drink   nine. 
Eye  Onyanic    mmara   se   obi   riiVwia   nc  yni'iko   adc, 
//   is  a  dirine  Ian-  llial  none  shall  .sle((l  Jiis  neifihlxnir's  Illinois. 
'•  EytJL'  11*)  se  gs6   dac,   //  appeared  lo  hini  as  if  he  nuis  dreandnii. 
Esf'ino  sc  etc   wg  Gcrniancfo  asasc  so   ligbcrc  nc  'neyi, 
Ihe   i-ondilion  of  llic  (remains'  'onnlr//  al  Ihal  linic  /cas   differenl 
fr(an   irhat  il  is  jioir. 
Esoiio  scnca  wof\Vcf\Vce  no  fac  kora, 
Ihc  vuinncr  in  a-hirh  Iheij  soiaihl  il.  iras  allo(ielher  differenl. 
d.  8c  g-nc  wgn  dii  no  yc  lin,  how  he  deall  wilh   them,    nuis  fri(ihlfnl. 
Scnca  gycc  no  fac  no  ye  nwoiiwa,  Jane  he  })erformed  il.  is  n'(mderfnl. 

2.  A  nonn-senlenie  standing-  in  tlie  placi-  of  a  noininalir''  (niiiple- 
inent  is  likewise  introduced   b}'   se.    E.  p,-. 

N'aseni   niu  nokwarc  ne  se   onni  sika, 
///('  IrnlJi   in  Itis  slorij  is,    Ihal  he  has  ia>  monet/. 

'.'>.   A   nonn-senlenx  stands  in  the  place  of  an  olijcl 

a.   witliont   conjunction,  after  the  verb   sc,   lo   sai/,   when   a   [jcrson's 

Words   (or   tboni;lits)   arc   quote  1    in    a   direct    or   indirect    way; 

h.   introduced    by  sc  or    scnca,    after    several    transitive    verbs,    cx- 

pressinn'  some   i)crce})tion   or  its   manifestation,   or  a  desire  to  do  some- 

tliiuL;'   or   tliat    it    be   done,     lii      the     latter     case,     the     succeeding;-    \crb 

staiifls   in   tlic   imperative  form. 

re.  Oniliafo  sc:   gkycna  nieye,   Ihe  slnii<iard  sai/s,  lo-morrotr  I  nill  do  il. 

Akura'  hg  ose  grcnoni  nsi'i,   na    wannyA   bi. 
in  Ihal  vilhuje  he  Ihoiuihl  lo  drin/,-  n'aler ;  hiU  lie  (jol  none, 
h.  Mate  sc  waba,  1  have  heard  Ihal  he  is  come. 

Muutie  scnea  gyee  no  fae,  listen  how  he  performed  il. 

Ohtii  se  ontumx  nye  ade  no,  he  saw  iJuU  he  coidd  not  do  il. 


§  255.  SUBORDINATE    SENTENCES.  157 

MuniTn   senea  otA  'iie  aii;i?  do  you  Jcnoii:  hoir  he  is  Ui-ilniiY 
Misiisuw'  so  oda  so  yar(',   1  iJiinJc  lie  is  still  si'k. 
Ki')ka  ky 01-0  HO  stj  riielja,  r/o  (and)  lell  him  Ihal  J  sliiill  loinr! 
Kycre  seiiea  onye  no  mfa !  show  hoiv  he  shall  do  il! 
Osnroe  sc  oliyko  Iio,  lie  ivas  afraid  to  fio  there. 
K»')bisa  no  sc  gbcba  ana?  asic  him  whether  he  will  rome. 
Osfi  (ok;1e  se,  obnaa  me  se)  omnia  (ommma,   oremma), 
he  says  (he  said,  he  answered  me)  he  will  (would)  not  lotrie. 
Osorc'c  me  se  memmo  no  bosca,  ]ieheg<icd me  to  letulhim  sonw  uuoiiui. 
Mosere  wo  sc   bcra,    1  heij  you  to  ronie. 

lleiv.  As  a  noun-seiitencc  standing  in  the  place;  of  an  object,  wc 
must  also  (grammatically)  consider  what  follows  after  the  \erli  in  a 
in  the  meaning  lo  let,  to  cause,  to  permit,  to  h((ve  (soitwthiuit  done), 
\n  iIk'  comjioimd  inii»erative  as  well  as  in  any  other  form.  ('A',  i^  IM,  1(>. 
(§'.»;"..)  §107,25.;   bnt  see  al.so  §  273,  1'-.    E.g. 

Oiiia  na  ema  gdehye  ye  akoa, 
phverlji  rauses  a  freeriuia  to  heroine  a  slave. 

4.  A  iioun-seiilenrc  stands  in  the  place  of  a  'owjilenwiit  of  jilu'e 
after  the  verb  fi;  bnt  we  consider  efi  se  and  efise  as  compound 
conjunctions  of  time  and   canse.     See  §  205.  275. 

Eti  se  mebaa  ha  yi,  meyare,   siwe  I  rame  here,   1  am  siiJi. 
O'yaw  no,   eiise   wagiian,  Jie  Si'olds  him,  herause  lie  has   jlrd. 

5.  A  nouii-sciilein'e  [or  adrerhial  sent,  of  rou/jiarisoii.  i<  2(>Sf^2('l'.•l, 
introduced  by  sc  or  senea,  stands  in  the  ])lace  of  a  roii/jilnueiil  nf 
iiiaiiner  after  the  verb   te   and  its  corresponding  verb  ye  (§  2()'.>,  1  ;. 

Ete  se  [or  senea)   w(')krie   no,   //  is  as  thou  siiidsl. 
Ebeye  se  mokfie  no,    it  will  he  as  ijou  said. 
Ete  se  wawia,  it  is  as  if  he  had  stolen  (it). 
Et(^  sc  osnro,  it  is  as  if  he  urns  afraid. 

An  ahhrevi(dion  of  such  noun-sentences,  and  contraction  with  the 
priiici])al  sentence,  takes  place,  when  the  jircflicate  of  the  noiui-sen- 
tence  would  bo  the  same  as  that  of  the  principal  sentence,  nnd  is. 
therefore,   left  out.    E.  g. 

(Jte  s(!  ne  nua  [to],  he  is  as  ]iis  brother  [is\ 

Yete  se   won    [^=  so   wote],    ii'c   aiw  as   Iheji  [arc]. 

Onyame  asem   t.c  .sc   asfie,   the  ward  of  Hod  is  lil:r  a    thniiim  r. 
Jrr.  2P,,  S'.K    Cf.  §  20'J,  ] . 

<i.  A  iioun-seidewe  stands  in  the  jdace  ol'  an  allyilntlr  in  l/tr  jjus- 
sessire  case 

a.   before  the  postposition   nti,   cl'.  §  2;>it,  4.  21:),  \  lie  it/  .2. 
h.   introduced   by   se,  alter  some  verbal   phrases. 

a.  Ohiifo   sur()   di'un   nti   orwa   alirodo, 

the  coward  deserts,  hecaiisr  lie  is  afraid  of  the  enem//. 
()nyarikopoh    nipe  as(Mnmone   nti   na  okye   din    mmiiikri-mnii.ikn, 
hci'iinsf  (ioil  docs  iitil  tike  misdeeds,    lie  (jace  a  name  to  eccrnlmdii. 


158  SYNTAX.  §  266 

Uiiw   in'ani  so  ma  mo  iiti  na  ixi\\c  ahici'i    nam,    lit.    for  Ijic    sulci'  of 

'hloir  Kpon  nifi  cue  for  me'  tiro  niilelojies  inilk  (hi  rouijxmi/).,  i.e. 

Ijiat  one  mail  hloic  upon  the  ollicrs  ei/e  etc.    CT.  "21'.).  ■_'.  Iiem.  :J.  .7. 
/).  \V()biiii  no  fo   se  wonkum  no  (^rr  wobnu  no   kum   lo), 

lliei/  eondeinned  him  to  he  killed. 
Mitnu  no  I'o   se  onko  so  (=  mituu  no   no  nkoso  lio  fo), 

/  iidmonished  him  to  po  on. 
Oliyoe  mo  ase  sy  obeboa  me  (=  gliyco  mo  no  boa  aso), 

he  promised  me  lo  help  me.    Cf.  §  214,  2. 
Osi'w"  mo   kwaii   so  monnyo  m'advViima,    or:    osivv  mi'   m'ailu  I'linn    ho 

kwan,  he  prohihiled  me  from  doinii  mi/  irork. 
llona  n;i  ogyoe  mo   asabawmu  so  miinn'tio   nokwaic, 

irj/o  did  hinder  you,  that  you  should  not  ol>ry  the  triithY 

Ahhreviation  and  Contraction  of  Noan-senteni-es. 
3Si>.     In  noun-sentences  introduced  by   so,    with  the.  following:;  vorb 
in   tlio  f'uturo  tonso,   the   conjunction   may  bo   omitted,   and   fbo  vorl)   is 
then    snhordinated  to    tlie   preceding  vorb   in   the   consc'idive  form,   or 
co-ordinated  in  the  neijatire  form.   E.  g. 

Obonya  ho  kwah  aye  senoa  ope,  he  will  h,avc  lHwrty  {ov  permission) 

to  do  as  he  likes. 
(Jf\vef\vo,  biribi  aye,  he  seeks  somethinfj  to  do. 

Onnya  ho   kwan   n'yo  senoa  opo,  lie  is  not  }>eruiittrd  to  do  as  he  likes. 
Hem.  Tlio  verbs  po,  to  desire,  he  /rilliny,   leill,    irisli,  intend.,  f\Vo 
['\\r,  to  seek,  and  tiimi  (Ak.  timi),  lo  he  aide,  lum,  are  cnnstrucd 
a.   with   a  noun-sentence  introduced   by  se  (§  2,')r),  8/>.); 
/;.    with    another    finite    rerh   in    the    conse'-utire  i'orm;    the   veil)    pe 

then  takes  the  complement  of  the  second   vorb  for  itstdf; 
r.    the  verb    tumi    in    the    negative   is   followed   by   the  second    '\rh 
likewise  in  the   negative, 
a.  Mope  so  mesoa  adesoa,  /  icish  to  rarry  a  load_  (or  loads). 
^Jp?  se  ogoru  mmom'  son   so   obeye   adwuma, 
he  likes  rather  to  jday  than  to  irork. 
Onyame   pe  se  yckyi  (or  yoiikyi)   bone, 

God  desires  that  ire  [miyht]  ahhor  sin.. 
Motumi  so  mesoa  adesoa,  I  shall  he  ahle  to  rarry  a  load. 
Mobeti'imi   so  monom    kuriiwa  no    anaso    wodo  asulio   no   iio  mo  nsi'i  V 
arc  yon   ahle  to   drink   of  that   'H/)    or    to    hr  ha}ili.:<'d  irilh   llml 
hoplism^    Mat.  20,33. 
h.  Mope  adesoa  bi  masoa,   /  seek  a  load  to  carry. 
Ofwefwo  adwuma  bi  aye,  he  seeks  some  irork  to  do. 
Mempo  obi   ti  matwa,  1  do  not  desire  lo  cut  "fj  any  >uan  s  lirad. 
.Morompe  ho   matra  da,   I  shall  nener  like  to  direll  thrrr. 
W(d)etiimi  aye  den?  ivhat  are  you  ahle  to  do':' 
^lotumi  masoa  adesoa  yi,   J  shall  he  ahle  to  rarry  Ihis  loud. 
r.  i\lintnmi  monsoa  hamaiika',   7  cannot  rarry  hammork. 
W.-inlumi   nnsoa   adesoa    no,    lie  could  nol  carry  that  load,. 
( 'onstructions   of  pe   and   tumi    with  simple   comjdemonts.    see  §  'liXo 
Item.  Cf.  §107,  12.  2a. 


§257.258.  SU150R1JINATK    SENTENCES.  150 

2.  Ailjcrlhm  Seriienrea. 

tJi>7.  All  iidjcrlivc  sc'iifi'il'C  takes  the  place  of  An  altril)iiti\-e  ad- 
jective and  iii.iy  be  attaclied  to  any  iioiiu  or  pronoun  (or  other  words 
oquivalent  to  a  noun),  l»e  it  the  siihject,  or  a  coiniileiiient,  adjunct  oi- 
attril)nt(\  It  is  connected  with  tlie  noun  to  wliich  it  h<'l(jn^-s,  and  which 
is  called  its  aiiJc'-cili'iil,  hy  the  r(dative  particle  'a'  (which  has  always 
the  low  tone,  hnt  no  conuiia  alter  it,  as  the  coiijunctixc  par(i(de  a 
4A  202.  270).    E.O-. 

Ade   a   enye   (~^-  aih^   lioiie)   iia    woye  no   yiye,     'i    lliliHj    ifltili    /s   iiol. 

flood  (a  hiul  Ihiih'i)  is  iinide  (jooil. 
Diu'i  ;i  eye  den   (diia  deiineu)   nkye   atViw   so,   a   li  ird  Ircr  dnrs   iiol 

Hl(Uhd  loii'l  oil    (I  pliliiUllioii  (it    will  soon   he   cut). 
O'di   aduaiV    a   eye,   de   (adnaiV   dyde),   li,('  ciils  iKthilithlc  fomi. 
Nni'pa   haiii'i  a    woki'i   no   sc   pe, 

Ihe  lira  ivcu,  irho  ii.rc  tralkinu  there,  <ire  likr  eiirj/  olhrr. 
Wi'n'i   a   wodii   no  so    hhiii.i    pcy   n'asem,    (d!  Jiis   siijier/'tirs   h'l:n/  luni. 
()iilj)a  a   inehoo  lus  diii   mekyeree  wo  no  aba, 

Ihc  7)ui,ii,  irliotn  I  weiilioned  to  yon,  his  come. 
Asein  a  wokae  no  n'te  sa,  [lie  mailer  irhi.r/i  ijoii  rehilcd  Is  iial  sn. 
]<.yere  nn^.  nea  oCae,  leli  me  irhhli   /raj/  lie  look. 
Miiinini   lako  a  okoe,   1  doiil  kno/r  in    irlilli   dir/'rliaii   Jir   ireiil  off'. 

Cf.  §  20(),  1.  205,  1  Jlem.h. 

Mon^   examples   see   in   i?OI.    an  1    adj.   sentences   .al'ti'i'   nea    in    i^  05. 

Jlcm.    1.    Such    adjectiv(!    sentences    are    \ cry    i'rei|Uent    in    'I'shi,    on 

account   ol'  the   scarcity   of  adjectives  and  the  enliri'  want  of  pai'ticiph's. 

I'ixcii    iKuins   are  snjipliefl  in  this  way;   e.  j;\  nea   \\dp(''  (n\c),    lliat  irh/.// 

I  lion,  irill  i.  e.   /////  irill  (he  done). 

lieni.  2.    On  two  or  more  adj<'cti\i'  sentences  in  successimi,  see  i>  2S2,  1. 

Ahlirevialiaii  af  yXdjerlive  Seiiieii'-efi. 

2»'».S.  1.  The  lirst  stcj)  towards  the  abbreviation  of  an  adjecfixe 
senlciice  joined  to  a  complement,  is  tlie  omission  of  Ijie  re/alive  /larl/rlr 
'a       !•:.  -! 

Wonhfi   asi'm    ko   wok.i,   lliei/  do   iiol  find  a  irord  la  sa//,  or  Ijir  s/wjlc 

(])e'uHar)   irard   (ivliirh)   liie/j  nii/jlil  say. 
2.    The   sah'jcrj   of   the    adjectis'e   sentence  is  0/>?/7/^.y/,    beside  the  relat, 
particle,    when    it    is    the   same   as   that   of  the    princijial   sentence;    the 
two    \eri)s   then    apjiear   as   ro-ordinah;.     K.  g". 

Oiini   babi  te  t^^^  onni  babi  a  ote  or  obetra,  lie  lias  not  wliere  lo  dinll. 
Nea   w/niya   dii   sfia  --  nea    wonyae    a    wodii    ar    wobedi    sfia, 

irlial  Ihe//  (jal  la  eal  iras  not  nni'li. 
(Jlieiie  no  nyaa  o]ian}im-|)a  lii  traa  ne  liT),  Ihr  kiiiji /lad  ((n  e  i''ellenl 
niinlsler  silliii'l  ad  his  side,  i.e.  irilli  him.  (In  this  case  tr,'i;'i  may 
be  taken  in  a  c-ansative  sense,  or  the  case  is  the  same  ;is  under  l.| 
Diia  bata  bo  ye  otwa  na,  §  25.")''  .\  1.  [In  this  example  not  the  si'eund, 
but  tlie  lirst  olthe  two  predicates  may  be  explaincil  by  an  ;iilj.  senl,| 


IGO  -  SYNTAX.  §  259.  2G0. 

,'}.  AVIicii  the  firxl  rerh  is  iirfi/il/rc,  tlir  ro-ord/iidlr  vcvlt  is  usually 
iu.'kIc  iiei/alire  too.    E.  g. 

( )niu  habi   nto  or  iiti-ri  =  ouni    bahi  U',   sec   al)o\('  uikUt   2. 
()nny;i  hiribi   nni  =;  biribi   a  odi   or  obodi,    hti  (jet^  itoUi/n;!  to  cul. 
Woaiilni   lo-pa   bi  atitu  no,  tlify  fontul  no  flood  (divide  to  ijirt'  him. 
Wonny.i   obi   iito   iiio  ^^  wonnya  cbi  a   wobeto   bio,    ilieij    i/o    iiol  ijcl 
niiiflliimi  lo  hujj  <(;iniii,  thi'tf  f/rl  iiolhiiifj  io  hin/  ainf  wore. 

4.  Tlic  abbroviation  may  also  take  place,  wlicn  tlic  sitJijr-l  ol  tin- 
ii(lj('.(iive  spiitencp   is  the   ohjt'''t  of  tlic  jiriii  ijxil  scntt'iicc. 

Wonnya   obi  ntg  bio  =  wonnya    obi  a  obctg  bio,  tJia/  do  jiot  (fd  am/ 
one  lo  hit)/  (Ujain,  the//  get  no  hni/er  (ini/  more. 
;').  Otlifv  rxani})los  of  ro-ordinfilion  of  a   ncfidlive  prediralr_.    \\  lien- 
wo   miglit  ('X])oct   an   adjoctive   sentence   with   an   affinnative   predicate, 
ari'   tlio  following   proverbs: 

()lii   ntutu  anoma  iVkokycre  opanyin  =  obi  nt.   anonia  a  ode  kokyere 
()]).,   a  person    does   not  plwlc  a  hird  [tUn's  not  i/o  lo  sJiotr  i.  e.) 
whi'di  he  is  (joimi  to  show  to  on  old  man  (to  inquire  for  its  name)- 
Obi  nye  yive  nnya   bone,  see  in  §  253''  B  1. 

Jicm.    Instead  of  an   adjective   sent,   after  a   negative    verl>    and   no- 
uiiuative  complement  implying  a   comparison,   a  sentence  willi  llie  con- 
junction na  and  the  verb  in  the  consecutive  is  used.   Cf.  §  2r)0,  "2.  271),  2. 
AHsem   nye  ntama  na  wgasi  ahata   gua  so, 
a  family  matter  is  not  a  ilolh  that  it  mi/iht  he  (^=  which   might   he) 
icashed  and  spread  out  in  a  jmhli.!;  plane  (to  dry). 
Xkramtoa  nye  nam  bi  nh  apofofV)  abg  din  aforo  po, 
the  nliramfatia  are  no  .^ur]i  fishes  that  flshcrmin  n-oiild  lannrh  into 
sea  on  account  of  them. 

(').  The  relat.  particle  and  the  snhje.rt  of  an  adjei.  sent,  are  also 
omitted  before  beye  (se),  behoro,  introducing  a  number,  wi'ight  nr 
measure   ap])roxiniattdy  estimated.     Cf.  ij  1  (lO,  4.  17;'),  2.  IS'.I,  2.  22".l.  2. 

3.  Adrerhiid  Sentences. 

tJi>1>.    An   adrerhial  sentence  (jualitics  the  predicate  of  the  priiuip.il 

one.  like   an   adjunct   of  place,   time,  manner  or  cause. 

WV  might  consiilcr  tliose  ntljiuicts,  which  are  iiitro(hi(c(i  l»y  nuxili.irv  vcili.^,  ;is 
tittrrrliiiU  srnlencr.^,  having  ilic  same  snhjf'ct  in  connntni  with  llic  i>rini  ijial  vcrlt; 
Itnl,  as  we  have  troatcil  (if  thcni  already  in  §  'Iiin.  2.4  2"27.  22'.(.  2;!:>— 2."Jr).  237. 
2")'.l  -24.'j.,  we  are  only  to  mention  such  cases  as  liave  not  yet  l>ceu  s]p(>k('n  of, 
csjHM  iaiiy  cases  in  which  the  .siihjcct  of  the  .auxiliary  is  difjcrtnt  iiom  that  of  the 
liiiniijial  verb,  together  with  a(lvcrl)ial  sentences  of  other  descriptions. 

a.   Adrerhial  Sentences  of  ]*l,('-e. 

!300.  1.  Adrerhial  senten-es  of  jilare,  introduceil  in  English  by 
nhcrr,  n'hilher,  /rhence,  arc.  expressed  in  Tslii  by  relalire  sentenc/:s 
att.-ieiied  to  certain  pronontis  (u-  nouns  of  phicr  by  the  relative  par- 
ticle  'a\  viz.   nea  ^=^  a  jiltirr   /r//r/7  (i>  d.")),   habi   a,   some  pi  a  ic  a  here. 


§2G1.262.  SUBORDINATE    SENTENCES.  IGl 

babiara  a,  any  pliice  ivhere,  fako  a,  the  place  ivhere.  Such  relative 
sontencf's  must  be  considered  as  udjeclire  sentences  belonging  to  no(a), 
babi,  fako,  and  those  expressions  are  either  locative  ('Omplvnuinta  a) 
or  adjuncts  ^).   E.  g. 

(I.  Meba  nea  owo,  /  shall  romc  icliere  he  is.    John  7,  34.  12.,  20.  14,  .9. 
Nea  woko  no,  mekg,  ichither  thou  (joest,  J  will  no.  linlJi  1,16.  §  G'),  11. 
h.  Mfrania  bo  wg  nea  epe,  tlie  ivind  hloweth  ivhere  it  listetJi.  John. 3, 8. 
Nea  wobewu  no,  mevvu,  where  thou  diest,  will  1  die,    liulh  1, 17. 
Ijabiara  a  vvobekg  no,   niedi   wo  akyi,    I  icill  follow  thee  whitherso- 
ever thou  (joest.    Mai.  8, 19.    §  65,  12. 
Hem.  Wlien  the  sentence   introduced    in  Englisli    by    where  &c.,  is 
not  an  adverbial  sentence,   but  a  noun-sentence  (§  255),   tbe  expressions 
ne(a),  b<Tbi(ara),  tTiko,  are  suhjectso^)  or  attributes  l^)  or  ohjeclivr  corn- 
plements  (e.g.  ai'ter    the    verb  hu,    nim,    bisa,    kyere,)'-J,    and    the 
relative  sentence  is  lik(,'\vise  an  adjective  sentence.    E.  g. 
a.  Nea  ofi   (ho)  bae  ue  nea  greko  ahintaw  wgn,    whence   he  came   ami 

whither  he  was  (joimj,  was  hidden  from  them. 
I).  Waka  me  nea  gkge  hg  nsem,  he  told  me  stories  of  ((he  plare)  ulirrc 

he  had  been. 
r.  Kyere  me  nea  ofac.    Minnim  fako  a  gkge.    §  257.    3Iat.  8,  20. 

'John  14,  .3.  4.  5. 
2.  An  instance  of  real  adverbial  sentences  of  place  (showing  extent), 
introduced   by  senea  (cf.  §  255,  1.  3.  5.  268.),  is   the.  following: 

Scnca  Filip  tumi  kgso  nliina,  obg  mnigdeh  se  ai'ika  oretgrn  Prote- 
stantefo  no  ase,  as  far  as  Philippis  power  reached,  he  endeavoit- 
rcd  to  e.dirjiate  the  Protestants. 

b.  Adverbial  Sentences  of  Time. 

!301.  1.  By  an  adverbial  sentence  of  time,  an  event  or  state  is 
mentioned,  to  show  the  timi  of  the  event  or  state  expressed  by  the 
predicate  of  the  principal  sentence.  We  call  the  former  the  sabordinate, 
and  the  latter  the  principal  event  (or  dale). 

2.  The  subordinate  event  (or  stale)  shows  either  (a.)  some  point  ov 
period  of  time,  answering  to  the  question:  when?  at  what  time?  or  (b.) 
duration  of  time,  answering  to  the  questions:  liow  long?  durintj  wliat 
time?  since  ivhen?  till  wJien?  or  (c.J  repelition,  answering  to  the  que- 
stion: liow  often? 

;3.  '1  he  two  events  (or  states)  may  be  simultaneous,  or  the  one  may 
be  antecedent  and  the  other  subsequent.  The  time  shown  may  be 
either  indefinite,  or  definite  (j)resent,  past,   or   fnture  to  the  siK-aker). 

302:.  1.  When  the  time  of  the  subordinate  event  (or  state)  \b  in- 
definite, i.  e.  when  th(^  case  may  ba))pen  (or  he  repeatful)  at  any  pre- 
sent f)r  i'uture  time,  tbe  partich'  'a'  (witli  a  comma  after  it)  is  added 
to   the   adverbial   sentence.     E.  g. 

11 


162  SYNTAX.  §  263.  264. 

Owia  puc  a,  yebesim',    icJie)i  the  sun  rises,  ice  sludl  start. 
Owia  rebepue  a,   yeuliCi  nsoroiua  bio, 

ivlien  the  sun  is  about  to  rise,we  do  no  more  see  tlie  stars. 
Obi  yare  a,  ofwefvve  aduru,  when  one  is  sick,  lie  seeks  for  medicine. 
Oyare  fi,  obetwefwe  adurn,  ivlien  he  is  sick,  he  ivill  seek  for  medicine. 
Oliianf  bu  be  a,  enhye, 

when  a  poor  man  makes  a  proverb,  it  does  not  spread. 
Oyare  n\sae  a,  wonnye  ayaresade,  when  (or  as  lon(j  as)  a  sickness 

is  not  yet  over,  no  reward  for  curing  it  is  asked. 
Rem.  1.  A  condition  is  expressed  in  the  same  way  (§  276,  1),  so  that 
often  the  sense  only    decides    whether  a  time  shall  be  indicated  or  a 
condition,  or  both  views  are  equally  admissible. 

Item.  2.  On  time  (or  condition)  expressed  by  co-ordination  see  §  2.')3-"'- 
276--1 

2.  Sometimes  the    conjnnction    na    precedes   the  principal   sentence. 
Of.  §  276,  2.    E.  g. 

Okyere  won  a,  nsi  o-ne  won  nam  abrana'  bi  so, 

when  he  was  teaching  them,  he  watked  with  them  in  a  certain  ponh. 
Opetc  te  tunu  nk.;i  a,   na  oreba, 

ivlien  the  vulture  smells   a  carcase,  it  comes  (fortlnrilJi). 
Edom  no  n'nya  nnu  won  nkyen  k,    na  woaguaii   dedaw, 

when  the  enetmj  has  not  yet  arrived  at  them,  they  are  fled  already, 

or,  they  are  fled  ere  the  enemy  arrives. 
Amanehunu  doso  a,  na  Onyame   boa  no  ben, 

U7hen  distress  is  greatest,  God's  help  is  nearest. 
,').   When  a  repetition  of  the  same  case  is  to  be  expressed,  the  words 
da,  or  da  biara  are  used   in  the  adverbial  sentence.    E.g. 

Dii  oretwam'  si,  oman  ho  kodidi,  as  oft  as  he  passed  by,  he  turned 

in  thither  to  eat  brectd.    2  Ki.  4,  S. 
Dii  owusihyen   ba  a,  wobere  no   hhoma, 

as  often  as  tlie  steamer  comes,  he  receives  letters. 
O'ba  da  biara  a,  na  woaguan,  whenever  he  comes,  they  flee. 

363.    When  the  subordinate  event  (or  stale)  is  in  progress,  or  con- 
tinuing, at  least  in  its  result,  in  the  time  present  to  the  speaker,  the 
d(^monstrative  particle  yi  is  added  to  the  adverbial  sentence.    E.  g. 
Mewo  wiase  yi,  mene  wiase  hann,    as  long  as  1  am  i)i  tlie  world, 

I  am  the  light  of  the  world.    John  9,  5. 
Mete  ase  yi,  meyi  Yehowa  aye,  ivhile  1  live  ivill  I  praise  the  Lord. 
Woanya  aba  yi,  tra  ase,  as  you  have  come  now,  sit  down! 
Worekyerew  yi,  merekan  rihoma,  ivhilstyou  are  writing,  lam  reading; 

mekan  nhoma  yi, 1  shall  read  this  book; 

—  makan  rhoma  yi  mawie,  —  1  have  read  this  letter  to  the  end. 
O'som  yi  nhinri,  na  nsrafo  rekyin  ref\Vef\ve  no,   fdl  the  while  he  was 

thus  serving,  soldiers  were  going  about  seeking  for  him. 

24>  I.  1.  When   the  time  of  \\\e  subordincde  event  is  known  to  the 
speaker  as  past,    or    when    it  is    represented    as  future,    but    expected 


§  265.  SUBORDINATE    SENTENCES.  163 

witli  full   certainty,  the  dcMiionstrative  particle  no   is  adtlcnl  to  tlio  ad- 
verbial sentence.    E.  g. 

Edom  bae  [or  reba)  no,  nknrofo  no  guane, 

tvJien  the  enemy  came  (or  icas  in  eomimj),  the  people  fled. 
Obene  no  wui  no,  ne  ba  bedii   n'ade, 

wlien  the  Jcin/j  (iiad)  died,  his  son  succeeded  him. 
Obae  ara  pe  no,  misiim',  jn^t  when  he  came,  I  started. 
Owiil  n'nya  mpuei  no,  yesiini',  hsfore  he  sun  rose,  we  started. 
Yesu  beba  no,  ne  nnainfo  ani  begye, 

ivhen  Jesus  will  come,  his  friends  shall  rejoice.    Cf.  Mat.  .25,  SI. 
Adam   wui  no,  nil  n'asefo  doso   bebre, 

when  Adam  died,  his  descendants  were  very  numerous. 
Lot  diiu  Soar  no,  na  a\via  apue, 

the  sun  teas  risen  when  Lot  entered  into  Zoar. 
WotoiV   Yosef  no,  na   wadi  rafe  dunson, 

Joseph  was  seventeen  years  old  allien  lie  was  sold.    Cf.  den.  41,  40. 

2.  After  ara  pe,  just,  exactly,  occasionally  also  in  other  cases,  the 
particle  no  is  omitted;  the  adverbial  sentence  is  then  distinguished 
from   a  principal  sentence  only   by  the  higher  tones.    E.  g. 

Ohdd  no  ara  pe,  oyaw"  no,  as  soon  as  he  saw  him,  he  scolded  him. 
Otrria  ase,  ony;i<\  ako  nnii,   he  had  many  wars  to  fight  in  his  life. 
Otraa  ase,  wanserew  ara  dn,  he  never  laughed  in  his  lifetime. 
Ohene  no  wui,  wanny;1  obi  annyam  no, 
ivhen  the  Iciny  died,  nohody  mourned  for  him. 

Rem.  When  the  particle  n  o  is  wanting  and  the  principal  sentence 
begins  with  na,  the  adverbial  sentence  of  time  also  appears  as  a  prin- 
cijial  sentence;  and  the  case  is  rather  that  of  co-ordination.  §  2.50, 1^".  E.  g. 

Oreye  eyinom  lihinil,  na  wohhfi  no, 

whilst  he  teas  doing  all  this,  he  ivas  not  found  out. 
Ebeye  m'fe  ahanah  ni,  na  Portugesifo  baa  Xkran   kah, 

about  400  years  ago  the  Portuguese  came  first  to  Akra. 
Wanni  mfe  di'i,  na  ne  na   de  no  kofwee  ne  nena  anim",    he   nuts  not 

yet  ten  years  old,  when  his  mother  brought  him  to  his  grandfather. 
Eyee  sa'  ahkye  na  owui,  not  long  after  this  he  died. 
Wanwu  na  ofii  ase  porgwe,  alive  he  began  to  putrif'y. 
Owg  n'agya  off  ara,   na  ofi  tee  Kristofo  ho  asempa,   whilst  he  was 

still  living  in  his  fathers  house,  he  had  already  heard  a  good  rej>ort 

of  the  Christians. 

36S.  1 .  When  the  adverbial  sentence  states  the  beginning  of  a 
time  of  some  duration,  it  commences  with  efi  se,  .since,  frequently 
ends  with  no  or  yi,  and  precedes  the  principal  sentence.    E.g. 

Eft  se  wowoo  me,  many  are  pen,  .sim-e  I  ivas  horn,  1  was  never  sick. 
Efi  se  gbaa  ha  yi,  mihuii  no  preko   pe, 

since  he  came  here,  1  saw  him  only  once. 
Efi  se  gkgtrAa   ho  no,  gyare  ara, 

sinre  he  settled  there,  he  is  rontiinially  si-k. 


164  SYNTAX.  §  2GG. 

Hem.  Duration  since  a  certain  event  or  of  a.  certain  stale  is  also 
expressed  by  a  principal  sentence  (with  the  verb  ne)  having-  the  event 
either  a.  preceding  it  in  a  co-ordinate  principal  sentence,  orb.  succee- 
ding it  in  an  adjective  sentence  joined  to  the  nominative  comjdement 
yi  (which  is  usually  contracted  with  the  verb  ne  into  ni).    E.g. 

a.  Obae,  n'afe  ni,  lit.  he  came,  its  year  is  this,   i.  e.  he  came  a  year 

apo;  or  better: 
h.  Afe  ui  a  obae,   lit.  a  year  is  tli/s  iJiat  he  catne,    i.  e.  it  is  a  year 

since  he  came. 
a.  Okoyaree,  ne  dadu  ni,    he   fell  sick  (ils  tenth,  day  is  this,  i.e.)  ten 

days  ago; 
h.  (Ne)  dadu  ni  a  oyaree,  it  is  ten  days  since  he  fell  sick, 
a.  Oyare  (beye)  osram  ni,  he  is  sick  {will  he,  i.  e.  about)  a  month  non\ 
h.  Ebeye  osram  ni  a  oyare  ara, 

it  is  now  about  a  month  that  he  is  sick  continually. 

2.  When  the  adverbial  sentence  states  the  end  of  a  time  of  some 
duration,  it  is  introduced  by  besi  se,  kosi  se  (kopeni  se,  kodu 
se  &c.),  till,  until,  also  in  the  past,  consecutive  and  imperative  forms 
(co-ordinate  to  the  predicate  of  the  principal  sentence),  sometimes  com- 
bined with  the  auxiliary  verb  de,  and  succeeds  the  principal  sen- 
tence.   E.  g. 

Otuu  'mirika  besii  se  ohuiiyen,  he  run  until  he  saw  us. 

On'tra  ho  nkosi  se  meba,  he  shall  stay  there  till  I  come. 

(jfwee  no  ara  kosii  se  owui,  he  flogged  him  till  he  died. 

Mmusi'i  yi  betiw  wo  de-akosi  se  wobesee,  this  mischief  will  jiursuc 
thee  until  thou  perish.    (I)eut.  28,  20.  22.  24.) 

S6f>.    1-  When  the  subordinate  event  sets  in   after  or  during  the 
principal  one,  the  adverbial  sentence  is  introduced  by   th(^  conipoun*! 
conjunction  ansa  na  (or  ansa-na),  before.    E.g. 
Wgwoo  Yesii  ansjt-na  Herode  wui, 

Jesus  was  born,  before  Herod  died. 
WoaiVka   wo  ano  ansa-na  wode  mali  me, 

thou  didst  not  taste  it,  before  thou  gave.st  it  me. 
Onyame  wo  ho  ansa-na  biribiara  reba, 

tiod  existed  before  any  thing  (came  into  existence). 
Wgkd  beree  ansa-na  oretie,    lit.  they   sj)oke    were    tired,    be  fare   he 

listened,  i.  e.  only  ly  continued  entreaties  he  was  per.sutnicd. 
Edii  una  pi  ansfi-na   worekohii  n'amii, 

lit.  //  took  (or  lasted)  many  days,   before   they   found  J/is   corpse, 

i.  e.  a,fter  severed  days  his  corpse  was  found. 
Miirenwie  ansa-na   rao  wura  aba, 

you  will  not  finish,  till  your  master  be  come.   {Mat.  ](),  2P>.) 

Hem.  Such  an  adverbial  sentence  may  be  added  to  another,  flic 
verb  of  which   is  omitted  by  way  of  ellijisis.     E.  g. 

Nnaiinu  [t\vaavn'|  ansa-na  wohun  no,  two  day>>  \pass('d\  before  tltey 
found  him.  i.  e.  after  ta\)  days  he  aut.s  found. 


§  207.  20S.  SITnOUDINATE    SENTENCKS.  1 05 

Mfe    ohk   no    flumicnsA    ansa-nsi    worewo    Kri'sto    no,    Gornijinefo    no 
Komnfo  kobooo  ko,    1]3  years  before  Christ  iras-  horn,    the  Ger- 
mans hefjan  to  fi<ild  with  the  liomans. 
2.  When  the  principal  event   is   laslimf  until  the  subordinate  event 
sets  in   or  is  finislied,   the  adverbial  sentence  begins  with   na  and  ends 
with   ansa   (after    whicli    a    new    action  replacing    the   jtrincipal  event 
may  be  supplied).    E.  g. 

'J'ra  ha,  na  me  nua  mmera.  ansiX  [ua  woaku  wo  asem], 
stay  here  till  my  brother  comes  [and  then  you  may  tell  your  story]. 
To  wo  bo  ase,  na  meiikyerew"  me  nhoma  ansa,  have  patience  till  I 
have  ivritten  my  letter  [and  then  I  shall  be  at  your  disposal]. 

Hern.  We  may  as  well  consider  the  sentence  introduced  by  na  as  a 
second  (co-ordinate)  principal  sentence,  and  the  word  ansa,  as  an  ad- 
verbial adjunct  of  time,   meaning  before  or  meanwhile. 

c.  Adverbial  Sentences  of  Manner. 

t267.  Adverbial  sentences  express  the  manner  or  degree  or  extent 
of  the  action  or  state  expressed  in  the  principal  sentence  in  various  ways : 

1.  by  comparison,  showing  a.  manner  and  (/nalily,  as  to  likeness, 
similarity  or  equality;  b.  def/ree,  as  to  equality,  inequality  (extent  or 
deficiency)  or  proportion; 

2.  by  stating  an  effect  or  consequence  (showing  extent.) 

{\a.)  Adverbial  Sentences  of  Comparison  showing  Manner. 

JiOS,  The  adrcrbifd  sentence  of  comparison  regarding  mfcnner  is 
introduced  by  te  se,  se,  or  senea,  and  may  have  no  or  yi  at  the 
end.  It  either  succeeds  the  principal  sentence «;),  or  \i precedes  it,  and 
the  hitter  is  then  usually  introduced  by  sa  na,  saara  na,  sa  nso 
na,  or  has  saara  at  the  end^V,  or  a  second  subordinate  sentence 
(noun-sentence),  likewise  introduced  by  se,  is  made  the  complement 
to  the  verb  no  (preceding  it)«^. 

a.  Onantew  te  so  wabere,  he  walks  as  if  he  were  tired. 
W^anyi  won  aye  se  ebinom  ye  no, 
he  did  not  praise  them,  as  others  did. 
Fibao  se(nea)  mekae  no,  it  came  as  1  said. 
Oyee  senea  oreko  n'anim\ 

lie  made  as  thowjh  he  would  have  (jone  further.    Luk.  ;Jj,  ;,As'. 
Oye  won  senea  agya  ye  mma,  he  treats  them  as  a  father  his  children. 
Monye  pe,   senea  mo  agya  a  owo  soro  no  ye  pe, 
be  perfect,  as  your  Father  that  is  in  heaven  is  perfect. 
Other  examples  see  §  255, 5. 
/>.  Nka  se:  Se  gyee  me  no,  sa'  na  meye  no,    say  not,    I  will   do  so  to 
him  as  he  has  done  to  me.    Fror.  24,  29.  Cf.  Judg.  t7. 
Senea  gtwekyew  yeraa  mpoano  no,  sa  nso  na  borok3'ew  yeraa  kwaem  , 
as  it  happened  to  a  hat  of  an  antilopes  skin  to  be  lost  on  the 


166  SYNTAX.  §  2G0.  270. 

seaside,  so  it  happened  lo  a  lial  of  Enropeax   iiiaiinfa-Aarc  lo  he 

lost  in  the  hush.   Fro  v. 
Sc  ilote  te  wo  onwemfo  iisam'  no,  sa'ara  ii;\  nic'i  iiso  iiiotc!  wo  inc  iis;iiv)", 

as  the  day  is  in  the  potters  hand,  so  are  ye  in  >nine  //and.  Jer.l8,r). 
Senea  mope  se  nnlpa  nyo  mo  no,  mo   iiso  monye  avoi'i   s.lara, 

as  ye  icoidd  that  men  shoidd  do  to  you,  do  ye  (dso  to  them  like- 
wise.   Luk.  G,  31. 
e.  Senea  mo  agyanom  yee  no,  se  nso  moye  nen, 

as  your  fathers  did,  so  do  ye. 
Se  woye  adwiima  no,  se  metua  wo  kaw  nen, 

as  you  work,  so  1  will  reward  you. 

Se  gwo  nam  no,  se  oda  ara  nen,  as  the  snalce  walks,   so  it  sleej>s. 

Rem.  Manner  of  a  predicate  (comjjarison)   may   also   be  expressed 

by  co-ordination  of  another  predicate.    See  in  §  253'^-    Ebia  bataiii  bia 

pani.     Momono  tew   na  guanhuaii  tew.     Nsatea  nye  pono-ua  nye  tee  na. 

Ahhreviated  Sentences  of  Comparison  showiny  Manner. 

t201>.  When  the  adverbial  sentence  has  the  same  predicate  as  the 
principal  one,  they  both  are  contracted,  the  predicate  being  expressed 
only   once.    E.  g. 

Oheue  aso  te  se  esono  aso  [te], 
the  car  of  a  kiny  is  like  that  of  an  elephant. 
O'ye  nnam  se  gyata  [ye  nnam],  he  is  as  hold  as  a  Hon. 
Wobii  won  bra  se  abosonsomfo  [bii   won   de], 
they  hehave  themselves  as  heathen. 
Wosom   wgii  adehye  no  se  nkoa  [som  won'  wnran6in|, 
they  serve  their  nohlemen  like  slaves. 
Wotonton  won  se  [wgtgii]   hkoa  [or:   se   wgnye   nkoaj. 

they  sell  them  as  slaves. 
Papa  nso  fom   ade  so  se  nnipa  nhhui  [foni   soj, 

the  pope  also  is  fallihle,  as  all  men  are. 
O'di   man  no  so  se  [odii  so]   kah  no, 
he  rules  over  the  peojjle  as  formerly. 
Wgpe  \vee  bio  sc  [wope  wee]  kan  no  ara, 
they  were  repulsed  again,  just  as  he  fore. 
Other  examples  see  §  255,  5. 
]{em.   Such    abbreviated    sentences    of   comparison    may  as   well   be 
considered   as  adjuncts  of  manner,    introduced   by   se  or  te  se;    e.g. 
Oye  hu  se  akokg,  he  is  cowardly  like  a  hen. 
Qnantew  te  se  oyarefo,  he  walks  like  (similar  to)  a  sick  man. 
When  they   were  parts   of  elliptical   adjective  sentences    and  belong- 
only  to  a  noun,  not  to  a  predicate,   m'c  may  even  call  them  allrihutes 
of  manner;  e.  g. 

Da  se  'ue,  a  day  similar  to  to-day.    Cf.  §  248,  6. 

{Ih)  Adverhial  Sentences  of  Comparison  showimj  Ucyrec. 

270.  1.  Equal  degree  is  expressed  in  the  same  way  as  manner 
in  §268^-.    E.g. 


§  271.  272.  SUIJOKDJNATE    SKN'J'KiSCKS.  1G7 

So  osoro  ware  sen  asase  no,  se  n'adoe  so  wd  won  a  wr)Suro  no  so 
ne  no,  as  iJic  heaven  is  Iwjh  ahove  11  w  earth.,  so  (jrcai  is  Ids  mcn:ij 
toward  them  that  fear  him.    Ps.  103, 11. 12. 

2.  A  lower  de^jree  is  expressed  by  a  negative  verl)  in  tin-  prinripal 
scntcnci^   and  an   adverbial  sentence  witb   se.    E.  g. 

Owusihyen  nnam  ntem  se  anoma  tu, 
a  steamer  does  not  run  so  swiftly  as  a  bird  flies. 

3.  A  hifjher  detjree  expressed  in  the  principal  sentence  rcMpiires  tlie 

use  of  kyeii  or  sen   before  the  adverbial  sentence  with  se.    E.g. 

Oye  okwasea  sen  se  oye  bone,  he  is  wore  stupid  than  wicJced. 
Anoma  tu  ntem  sen   se  gponko  tu  'mirika, 

a  bird  flies  swifter  than  a  horse  runs. 
Me  bone  so  ade  so  kyeri   se  metumi  masoa, 

7ny  punishment  is  greater  titan  1  can  hear.    (xen.  4, 18. 

Abbreviated  Sentences  of  Comparison  showing  Degree. 

S71.  When  the  predicate  is  the  same  in  both  sentences,  the  ad- 
verbial sentence  is  iinvariably  shortened,  and  nothing  remains  but 
the  conjunction  se  for  equal  or  lower  degree,  or  the  verb  kyen  or 
S(!n  (in  the  affirmative  or  negative  form),  with  the  subject  or  object 
or  attribute  different  from  that  of  the  principal  sentence.    Cf.  §  269. 

Odo  no  se  [odo]  nankasa  ne  kard,  he  loved  him  as  Ids  own.  sonl. 
Mepe  ha  se  [mepe]  ho,  /  like  this  place  as  well  as  that. 
Akuropoh  ne  Mampoii  ntam'  kwan  ware  se  Aburi  ne  Mampon, 

the   way  from.  Akropong   to    Mampong  is   as   far  as   tluU  from 

Aburi  to  Mampo)ig. 
Mepe  se  mema  okyikafo  yi   se  wo  ara, 

1  will  give  unto  tJds  last,  even  as  unto  thee.    M<d.  20, 14. 
Susono  n  so  se  sono,  tlic  riverhorse  is  not  so  large  as  the  elephant. 
Esono  so  sen  susono,  the  elephamt  is  larger  tluin  the  Idppo/jotanras. 
Israel  do  Yosef  sen  ne  mma  nhinci, 

Israel  loved  Joseph  more  than  all  his  children. 
So  minye  memma  wo  menseri   mmabarima  du  ? 

am  not  1  better  to  thee  than  ten  sons? 
Mepe  se  metra  ha  mmoni  sen  ho, 

/  should  rather  prefer  to  stay  here  titan  there. 
Wopc  Slim  mmom'   kyeh  hahn   no, 

they  love  darkness  rather  than  light.  , 

Adverbial  Sentences  of  Froportion. 
272,     The  degree  of  an  action,   state  or  quality,  is  stated  as  being 
in  proportion  to  another  action  &c.  in  the  form   of  an  adverbial  sen- 
tence of  time,  expressing  an  action  simultaneous  with  thai  of  the  prin- 
cipal sentence.    E.  g. 

Woreforo  bepow  tenteh  no,  na  awow  no  mu  reye  den, 
the  higher  you  ascend  a  high  mountain,  the  colder  it  becomes. 


3  68  «YNTA:i.  §273. 

Ivoiiiafo  III!  KartagntV)  nliiu;),  woreiiya  wonliu  ba  no,  iiaiisct  -wrirepp 
iisase  f'ofViro  akyi  kwaii,  hotli  the  Itonuuis  diul  the  (juiJuKjiiHaus, 
the  richer  they  (/rvir,  the  wore  they  sought  for  new  eOHtitrics. 

(2.)  Adrerhial  Senteiir.cs  of  Extent. 
!:i73.    1.   An   advei-bial    sentence    sliowinj;-    tlic  OJteiit  of  an   artion 
by  stating  its  effect  or  consequence,    sncceods    tlie    principal   sentence 
and  is  joined   to  it 

a.  by  tbe  relative  jiarticle  'a';   h.  by  the  conjunction   se; 
c.    by  tbe  auxiliary  verb  mil,  to  give,  occasion,  cause.    E.g. 
fl.  Nkrante  woo  ne  mfem'  a  anni  dabi  owui, 

the  sword  cut  his  side  so  that  he  died  soon  after. 
O-ne  won  koe  para  won  a  efi  ho  woamma   bio,  he  foaghl  with,  them 
and  defeated  them  so  that  from,  that  time  they  came  no  more. 
Ese  se  mudi  mpanyin   ni  a,  se  worekasa  a,  munUia  nio  ano, 
you   ought   to  honour   old  people,   so  that,  when  they  sjicak,   you 
forhear  talking.    Of.  Gen.  41, 19.  such  as. 

Item.  Two  examples  converted  into  contracted  sentences  with  co- 
ordinate negative  predicates,  see  in  §  253''  C  1. 

Obi  mmua  n'ano  nni  fo  =  obi  nimiia  n'ano  a  obedi  f'o. 
Obi  nuidi  nnu  nebo  ::=  obi  unidi  a  obeuu  neho. 

h.  Nnae  no  iVware  se  obi  betee  nc  mii  wo  so,  na  inrnuatani  no  n'so 
se  ode  bebiim  no  so,  the  bed  is  shorter  than  that  [lit.  not  (so)  long 
that]  a  man  can  stretch  himself  on  it,  and  the  covering  narrower 
than  that  he  can  ivrap  him,self  in  it. 

•:.  Oteem'  ma  eye  lift,  he  Cries  (so  that  it  causes  fear,  i.  e.)  fearfully. 

Okfia  asem  no  ma  eyee   nwonwa, 
he  spoTie  the  word  (so  that  it  caused  wonder,  i.e.)  /ronderfulli/. 

Sa'  ahohora  yi  yee  no  yaw  ma  etraa  so,  this  igimnani/  grieved  Itiin 
(so  that  it  went  heyond,  i.  e.)  excessively. 

Oboo  no  ma  otoe,  he  struck  him  so  that  he  fell  (dead). 

Okali  dom  no  gui  ma  wode  hii  ne  snro  gnane, 
lie  defeated  the  enemy  so  that  they  fled  u^ith,  fear  and  terror. 

Ankye   n;i    woatutu  dom   no   agu  ma   wode  mmirika  aguai'i, 
they  liad  soon  repidscd  the  enemy  and  put  tliem  to  fiasty  fliglil. 

Edom  no  dii  asase  no  so  nneenia  nliin;i  ma  esae,  ma  ok<'iin  kum" 
nnipa  jti,  tlie  host  ate  up  ererythiny  in  th.e  country,  so  that  nainy 
j)ersons  diegf  from  liunger.  (Odi  ma  esa,  he  eats  causes  to  he  con- 
sumed, i  e.  fte  eats  up.) 

Otumi  tow  bo  a  eye  duru  m?i  cdii  akyiri,  fic  is  alilc  to  throw  a 
liewvy  stone  (so  that  it  arrives  behind,  i.  e.)  very  far. 

2.  The  extent  of  an  action  may  also  be  expressed  by  an  adv.  sent. 
introduced  by  kosi  se,  kodu  se  &c.  (equal  to  an  adv.  sent,  of  time, 
§2G.^2).    E.g. 

Wokunkum'  won  kosii  se  woguu  won  ase, 
tJiey  smote  them  until  tliey  had  destroyed  them.  Josh.  11, 14. 


§  274.  275,  suHOKDiNATii:  sentences.  169 

d.  Adrerhial  Sentences  of  Cause. 

*,i'7t.    Adverbial  sentences  of  cause  indicate 

1.  a  real  cause,  occasion,  molire,  fironnd  or  reason  (cf.  ij  2;!S,  1  j -, 

2.  a  condilion ;  3.  a  concession:,  4    an  intention  ov  jtnr/iose. 

U7»>.  (!•)  A  real  cause,  motive  or  reason  is  exjircsscd  by  iuUcrbial 
sentences  in  the  f'olb)\ving  ways; 

1.  The  ad\erbial  sentence,  preceding  tlie  principal,  is  inlroduccd  by 
the  words  esiane  se,  or  ef'i  se,  or  se  abnie,  and  bas  tbc  postposition 
(or  conjunctive  particle)  nti  at  tbe  end.    E.g. 

Esiane'  se  gye  anrm  d;i  di  nokware  nti,  ankye  na  onyful  opanyiii 
bi  dii,  because  li-e  was  always  dili'ieut  and  faitlifnl,  lie  was  soon 
entrusted  with  an  offi'-c. 

Esiane  se  wosii  won  bo  ua  eyee  nti,  Onyankopon  nliyira  amina  so, 
as  they  hud  done  it  in  sel'fwiU,  (xod's  hlessinfi  was  not  upon  it. 

Elise  wotari  no   nti,  wokiini'  no, 
hecause  they  hated  liiin,  iheij  killed  him. 

Se  uiaf'rc  na  mokame  nti,  nierenifre  mo  bio,  hcrduse  J  have  called 
and  ye  refused,  1  will  not  r.(dl  you  ajjain.    (Frov.  1, 24-^(1.) 

Hem.  1.  Tbe  verb  siane  means  to  ()o  alomjside,  or  like  fi,  to  pro- 
cede  from,  and  nti  may  be  considered  as  meaning  tbe  starting-point 
(i^l21).  'I'bis  word,  after  tbe  omission  of  tbe  verb,  denotes  causality 
by  itself,  as  a  mere  postposition.     Of.  §240rt.  7>. 

JUm.  2.  Wben  tbe  words  esiane  se,  efise  or  se  are  dropped,  e.  g. 
wotaii  no  nti,  wokum"  no,  tbe  remaining  subordinate  sentence  witb  nti 
at  tbc  end  may  still  be  considered  as  an  adverbial  sent,  of  cause, 
and  tbe  postposition  nti  migbt  tben  be  taken  for  a  suhordinative  con- 
junction (not  mentioned  as  sucb  in  §  141,  but  cf.  1  Be),  as  we  call 
cnti  =  eno  nti,  at  tbe  bead  of  a  principal  sentence,  a  co-ordinative 
conjunction,  §  140.  But  we  may  also  consider  tbe  subordinate  sen- 
tence 'wotaii  no'  as  a  noun-sentence  belonging  to  tbe  post])osition  nti 
an<l  forming  witb  it  an  adjunct  of  cause  (§  255,  Ga)  ^^  n  i  tan  nti 
(§  24()/|).  Tbe  latter  view  agrees  better  witb  tbe  case  of  an  impera- 
tive sentence  before  nti,  as  in  'Huw  m'ani  so  ma  me  nti',  wberefore 
we  adopt  it  also  for  tbe  otber  cases  in  §  255,  6a.    §  279,  2  Hem.  2.  H. 

2.  Tbe  adverbial  sentence,  introduced  by  efise,  or  se  alone,  suc- 
ceeds tbe  principal;  it  may  also  bave  nti  a  added  at  tbe  end.    E.g. 

Wasopa  me,  efise  miyii  ne  bone  adi  ntia,  he  h.as  slandered  me,  he- 
cause  I  revealed  his  wickedness.  —  Cf.  Mat.  16,  7.  8. 

Ycanyji  aburow'  pi,  efise  asase  no  ye, 
we  (jot  much  corn,  hecause  the  land  is  good. 

Ode  abo  yiye,  efise  osii  ato  pi, 
yam  has  (frown  well,  hecause  it  has  rained  much. 

Da  no  asc  so  waboa  wo,  thank  him  that  he  has  helped  you. 

Won  ani  gyei  se  wawu,  they  rejoiced  that  he  was  dead. 

Minnue!  se  mabcsoe  Mesek  !    Fs.  120,5.  Cf.    Mat.  23, 13-15.  23.  25. 


170  SYNTAX-  §  27G. 

Wok;i  boom'  se   wo-iu"-  Napuloou  aiiyji,   thcij  ciilcrcd  into  a  cujifcdc- 

rdoj,   (ilic  n/olivc  of  which  wan)  that  theij  and  N<i})oleon  luid  (jot 

(scil.  a  li(ilhin(i,  war)  i.  o.  Iheii  nnilcd  arjaiiist  Napoleon. 

lion.    In   the  sentence    "Aliene  b;"is;i  no   ku  boom'  sy  wo-ne  onian  no 

ne  ko,  the  three  king.s  joined  (and  declared,  or,)  in  declaring  war  to 

the  (■Olintry''^    the  conjunction    nc    stands  in    the  jihice  of  a  verb;    we 

may  call   it  an  adverbial  sentence  of  manner  or  of  purpose. 

3.  TIk!  adverbial  sentence,  preceding  the  prinei])al,  has  the  particle 
'a'  or  yi  at  the  end.    E.g. 

Manuya  otg   mantg   wo  mi^  dom   anim   a,  mede  me  hkrante  merebere 

wo,  as  1  did  not  fall  at  the  head  of  niij  armij,  1  am  hrin<jin(i  you 

my  sword. 
Yetiye  no  sa  yi,   na  ast'm  bi  nni  ho  bio,  as  we  have  thusmana(jed 

it,  there  is  nolhin;)  to  be  said  (or  do)i.eJ  concenmuj  it  any  more. 
Oda  so  ye  merew  yi,  ontumi   n  tu   kwan  no, 

as  he  is  still  weak,  he  cannot  undertake  that  journey. 
Hem.  The  cause  expressed  by  a  co-ordinate  sentence,  sec  §  252. 

376.  (2.)  A  possible  cause  or  condition  is  expressed 

1.  by  an  adverbial  sentence  preceding  the  jjrincipal,  with  the  par- 
ticle 'a'  at  tlie  end  (which  has  always  the  low  tone  and  a  comma 
after  it,  distinguished  by  the  latter  from  the  relative  particle 'a') ;  cf. 
§257).    E.g. 

Woye  abofra  a,  nserew  akwatia, 

if  you  are  a  child,  do  not  deride  a  .short  man. 
Wojinya  woho  a,   to   wo  poh   nui  da, 

if  you  arc  rich,  shut  your  door  (wh,en  you)  sleep. 
Woto  adur'   a,  ebi  kfi  w'ano, 

if  you  administer  poison,  some  of  it  touches  your  month. 

2.  In  certain  cases,  when  some  emphasis  is  laid  on  the  condilion, 
the  principal  sentence   begins   with  na.    Cf.  §  2G2,  2. 

Obi  do  wo  a,   na  osere   wo  ho  ade, 

if  anybody  loves  you,  (ihe)tj  he  will  he()  of  you. 
Wudi  bi  ade  a,  na  wofere  no, 

//■  you  yet  food  of  any  one,  (then)  you  respect  him. 

3.  Sometimes  the  conjunction  se  is  put  at  the  head  of  the  conditional 
sentence.  (The  word  eba  or  etg,  it  comes,  happens,  chances,  is  to 
be  supplied  before  se.)    E.g. 

Se  gkgm   de  wo  tamfo  a,  ma  no  aduah  ;    se  osukgm   de  no  a,  ma,  no 
biribi  nnom,  if  thy  enemy  hunger,  feed  him;  if  he  thirst,  give  him 
drink,    liom.  7^,  20. 
Hem.   In  these  sentences,   introduced  in  English   by  the  conjunction 
if,  the  conditional  action  is  conceived  as  doubtful.    Jn  others  it  is  con- 
ceived as  actually  taking  place,  though  at  an  indefvnite  time,  —  intro- 
duced by  when,  §  262,  —  and    in   others   again   as  adversative  to  the 
consequential  action,    the    latter    taking    place   in  spite  of  the  former, 
introduced  by  though,  §  278. 


§  276"-  SUBORDINATE   SENTENCES.  171 

4.  When  a  ticofold  ivildilwii  is  given,  the  ilisjuiictivc  particle  '<•'  is 
used  instead  of  the  final   'a'.    Cf.  §  27,s,  3.     E.g. 

Se  yete  ase  o,  se  yewii  A,  yeye  Awurade   dea, 
tvhether  we  live,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's,    lloni.  14,  H. 

5.  When  the  condition  is  conceived  as  merely  imaginary  (when  the 
case  is  known  to  be  not  real),  the  principal  sentence;  takes  the  con- 
j unction  anka,  then,  in  this  case.    E.g. 

Se  mewo  sika  a.  anka  meto  otuo, 

//■  /  had  moneij,  J  should  huy  a  nun. 
Enye  n'adamfo  nti  a,  anka  woakuni  no, 

hut  for  his  friend,  lie  ivonld  have  hcen  killed. 
'Ka  akyckycre  ne  riwaw  nko  a,  anka  otuo  ntow   wurani    da, 

if  there  were  only  snails  and  tortoises,  no  (jun  would  ever  he  fired 

in  the  hush. 
'To  tamfo  hko  a,  anka   woakiim  me, 

if  I  had  only  enemies,  1  should  have  heen  killed. 
'Ka  nea  oko  Ahiirokyiri   nko  a,  ankii  Abibiman  abn,  if  Jie  who  went 

to  the  white  vuni's  ronnlry  nlone  icere  concerned,  Ne'jrohind  tcould 

have  heen  ruined. 
Bern.  The  words    ka    and   to    in   tlic  three   last   examples  stand  iV.r 
eka . . .  a,  if  there  would  remain,  eto  or  etoo  .  . .  a,   //"  it  would  jail 
or  if  it  fell  (to  . .  .). 

270"  1.  An  adverhial  sentence  of  (time  or)  condition  in  English, 
especially  when  connected  with  a  neffative  principal  sentence,  may 
often  be  found  expressed  in  Tshi  by  co-ordination ;  the  conditional 
sentence  is  then  delivered  as  a  principcd  sentence  negatived  like  the 
other.    E.  g. 

Obi  m'prd,  ua  obi  n"sesa\v\  one  does  not  sweep,  and  another  docs  not 
take  up,  i.  e.  when  one  person  sweeps,  another  does  not  take  up  (the 
sweepings  and  carry  them  out),  or:  the  same  person,  who  sweeps, 
will  carry  out  the  sweepinfis. 
Akosua  m'mo  mmusu  na  Akiui  mta,  Akosua  does  not  do  mischief  and 
Akua  does  not  take  i.  e.  suffer  it,  i.  e.  when  Akosua  causes  mischief, 
it  will  not  fcdl  on  Akua,  or,  Akua  does  not  answer  (and  is  not 
})unishedj  for  it. 
Other  examples,  also   with   affirmative  predicates,   see   in  §  'iSo-' 

2.  When  two  sentences,  standing  in  such  or  similar  relation  to  each 
other,  have  a  common  suhject,  the  conjunction  na  in  omitted,  and  both 
are  contracted  into  one  sentence  with  co-ordinate  negative  predicates. 
Cf.  §  253»-  258,  5. 

Obi  n  tu  mmere  u'sie  siw  so,  one  does  not  gather  mu.'^hrooms  does 
not  reposit  them  on  an  anthill,  i.  e.  when  one  gathers  m.,  he  does 
not  reposit  them  <('•'.'. 
Obi  n  so  gya  foforo  m'fa  iVwaw  ntom",  wlien  one  kindles  a  new  fire, 
he  does  not  put  snails  into  it. 


172  SYNTAX.  §277-279. 

Ji7T.  An  advcrltial  .sontonce  stating  an  exception,  or  a  coiulition 
under  wliicli  the  negation  of  a  predicate  is  annulled,  is  introduced  by 
gve  se  (or  se  gye)  and  succeeds  the  principal  sentence.    E.  g. 

Wurennu,  gye  se  wutu  mmirika  (=  se  Avuntu  'niirika  a,  wureiniu, 
or,  se  wutu  'mirika  a,   wobedu),  poa  iviV  not  arr/'re,  eX'-ej)l  yon  run. 

Meremnia  wohko,  gye  se   wiihyha  me, 
1  ivill  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me.    Gen.  32,  20. 

(Jrenliome,  gye  se  owie  asem  yi  di  'n6,  he  will  not  he  in  rest,  nii- 
til  he  hare  fininhed  the  thing  this  dag.    lintJi3,18. 

Wontwe  adevVia  ho  aso,   gye  se  nea  owiaa   ade   no   ahhCi   \\ia, 
tlieg  do  (or  nsmdly  did)  not  inflict  pnnishnient  for  theft  except  the 
thief  did  not  understand  to  steal,  i.  e.  was  nut  cunning  enough.. 

iJ7H.  (3.)  A  concessio]i  or  adrersatire  cause,  i.  e.  a  circumstance 
which  might  seem  adverse  to  the  })redicatc  of  the  principal  sentence, 
is  expressed: 

1.  by  an  adverbial  sentence  with  'a'  at  the  end  and  an  emjihatic 
particle  (po,  nso,   ara)  in  it.    E.g. 

MinnyA   mil  f\Ve  po  a,  nieye  ara, 

though  1  profd  nothing  by  it,  1  sluill  do  it  still. 
Mihu  mu  amane  nso  a,  mekuram'   ara, 

eren  if  I  must  suffer  by  it,  I  sliall  Jccep  to  it. 
Oso  se  deii  ara  a,  metumi  no, 

fiowever  great  fie  may  be,  1  sfiall  be  a  matcJi,  for  fiini. 
Nso  menam  owu-simsumA  bon  mu  a,  minsuro  bone  hi,  yea,  Oiougli 

1  wdlfi  tfirougfi  the  valley  of  tlie  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  eril. 
Hem.  A  condition    may   be    understood   as   adversative   without   an 
emphatic  jiarticle.  E.  g. 

(Jknm   de  w6  a,  wonVfa  wo  nsa   abieiV   n'nidi, 

thougli  you  are  finngry,  yon  do  not  eat  witfi  both,  fiands. 

2.  Sometimes  the  concessive  sentence  is  introduced  by  se  (cf.  §276,15), 
or  by  the  compound   conjunction  kansese.    E.g. 

»Se  me-ne  wo  bewii  po  a,   merempa  wo, 
thonyh,  I  should  die  witli  tfiee,  yet  will  1  not  deny  thee. 

Se  kjinsese  eware  se  eheara  a,  ua  oreba, 
however  far  it  might  be,  fie  was  sure  to  come. 

Se  cdu  nea  esc.  se  woye  yiyo,  na  kansese  eho  wo  here  po  a,  wam- 
mfi  anye  no  ahometew,  wfien  Occasion  was  given  to  do  good,  Ihotigh 
trouble  might  have  been  connected  with  it.  fie  was  not  dismayed. 

.3.  Instead  of  the  final  'a',  the  disjunctive  particle  'o'  is  used  when 
a  twofold  concession  is  stated.    Cf.  §  27(!.  4. 

O'di  bem  6,  odi  to  o,  oki'im  ara  na  wobekum  no,  wftether  fie  be  in- 
nocent or  guilty,  by  all  mea}is  tfiey  will  kill  him. 

270.  (4.)A  final  cause,  i.  e.  a  cause  conceived  as  the  ai)n,  })urpose 
or  intention  of  an  acting  or  directing  subject,  is  expressed  by  an  ad- 
verbial sentence  succeeding  its  principal  one. 


§  279.  SUBORDINATE   SENTENCES.  17.S 

1.  The  adverbial  sentence  is  introduced  by  se, 

ti.  with  the  verb  in  the  progressive  or  future  or  intfressivc  present  form, 
wlieu   its  suhject  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  principal   sentence; 

h.  with  the  verb  in  the  imp)erative  form,  when  the  .snJiject  of  the  .•ul- 
verbial  sentence  is  dijferent  from  that  of  the  principal  one,  and  the 
purpose  is  represented  as  a  decided  desire.    E.  g. 

a.  Yesu  Kristo  baa  wiase  se  obegye  nnipa  hkwa,    Jesus  Christ  '((me 

info  the  world  to  save  men  (or,  that  he  nwjht  save  men). 
Odehye  bi  koo  asase  bi  so  se  orekogye  n'ahenni,  a  certain   nohle- 

man  went  into  another  eoimtry  to  receive  for  himself  a  liimjdonK 

(Luk.  19, 12.) 
Ode  dom  akohye  wuii   kwan   wo  ho  se  gmmil  wontwam',  there  he  has 

.'^topped  th,e  way  against  them  with  an  army,   not  .sujfering  thvm 

to  pass. 
Wobehyiae  se   wobetra   ho  ase  afwe  se  wgbeye  no, 

they  assembled  to  deliherate,  how  they  would  manage  it. 
Oguan   kog  Osi'i  se  okofii  po   anf  ako  Ogua', 

he  fled  to  Christiansborg  in  order  to  go  to  Cape  Coast  by  sea. 
Otnia  korow  mu  se  orefi  hyeh   nom''  asi  fam', 

he  sat  into  a  boat  that  he  might  come  from  the  ship  to  the  land. 

b.  Onyame  somaa  ne  ba  baa   wiase  se  ommegye  imfpa  iikwii,   God  si'nt 

his  son  into  the  world  to  save  men  (that  he  mifiht  come  to  save.  men). 
Yudafo  scree  Pilato  se  omnia   wgiikokum"   Yesu, 

the  Jews  entreated  Pilate,  that  he  should  have  Jesus  killed. 
Omaii   mma   apaw  woii   s«j   wonye   won  ananmusifo, 

the  citizens  hare  cliosen  them  to  be  their  representanis.  *■ 

2.  The  adverbial  sentence  is  introduced  by  the  conjunction   n  a 

a.  with  the  verb  fn  the  consecutive  form,  when  the  purpose  is  rcjtre- 
sented  more  as  an  expectation  or  natural  consequence,  than  as  a 
decided  desire; 

b.  with  the  verb  in  the  affirmative  form  of  the  (2d)  imperative,  after 
a   1st  or  2d  imperative. 

c.  When,  after  an  imperative,  the  verb  of  the  accessory  sentence  is 
negative,  the  consecutive  form  is  used,   as  in  the  cases  under  ((. 

a.  Maiikasa  meye,  na  moasusuw  so  aye  bi,  I  7Vyself  shall  do  it,  that 

you  may  imitate  it  (lit.  think  on  it  and  do  it  likewise). 
Wohye  nam  nkyene  na  amprow  ntem, 

meat  is  salted,  that  it  may  not  soon  he  spoiled. 
Franse  bene    bi    a    gbgg   dam   nti  na  wode  nhomatow   bae,    na   ode 

agye  n'anf,  on  account  of  a  certain  king  of  France  thai  was  mad, 

card-playing  was  invented,  that  he  might  amuse  Ju'mself. 
Onyame   de  ne  ba  koro  niae,  na  obiara  a  obegve  no  adi  no  anyera, 

n{\  wanya.  dd  nkwa,  (rod  gave  his  only  son,  that  whosoever  belie- 

veth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlastiny  life. 

Cf.  §  258,  5  Bern. 

b.  Kobisa  no,   na  yei'ihu   mu   nokwarc! 

go  ask  hin/,  that  we  uiay  learn  the  truth  of  it! 


174  SYNTAX.  §  280. 

A'f'ei  gyji  no   kwan  na  gnko  fiel 

now  di.wiiss  him,  that  he  may  go  Jiome! 
Monye  komm,   na  minnya  nna  menna! 

he  silent,  that  1  may  find  slccj)! 
Fa  ogyateh   d\  n'anim'  na  onliu   kwan  (or;  r.  na  waiiycra  okwai'i), 

fio  before  him  tvitJi  a  torch,   that  he  may  find  Ihr.  tray   (or:    tliat 

he  may  not  go  astray). 
C.  Kose  no,   na   wanni  nkwaseasem, 

go,  tell  him,  in  order  that  lie  do  -not  commit  a  folly. 
Fwe   woho  yiye  na  obi  annada  wo, 

take  care  of  yourself,  that  nobody  deceive  yon.   Mat.  6,  1;  7, 1.  G. 

Mem.  1.  When  the  accessory  sentence  witli   na  and  the  verb  in  tlie 

consecutive  form  might  be  mistaken  for  a  co-ordinate  principal  sentence 

with  na  and  the  x^erfect,  the  verb  ye  may  be  used  before  it.    E.g. 

Mpanyimfo  no  boo   mmgden    yee    senea   nknrofo  pe  no,    de  yec  na 

gmanfo  no  ho  atg  won,  the  elders  endeavoured  to  do  as  the  people 

desired,  in  order  that  the  citizens  might  he  contented. 

Hem.  2.  Wlien  the  purpose  shall  be  mentioned  hefore  the  princi])al 
sentence,  the  adverbial  sentence  with  n  a  and  its  verb  in  the  conse- 
cutive form  takes  a  form  of  the  verb  ye  (in  the  present  or  future) 
before  it,  and  is  thus  made  an  attribute  of  the  postposition  nti,  form- 
ing with  it  an  adjunct  of  cause.    §255,  6 a. 

Wgye  na  mmarimawa  no  ahu  bemmatow  nti,   Spartsifo  ma  won  likod, 
na  wgde  won  sua  ye,  that  the  hoys  might  learn  to  shoot  witli  the 
how,  the  SjKirtans  gave  them  slaves  at  whom  they  exercised  it. 
Oye  n^  asem   hi  amma   akyiri   nti,  gma   wokum  won, 

to  cut  off  any  consequences,  he  had  them  Jcilled. 
Nea  ebeye  na   wganyfi  sika  nti,  wosii   gman  no  jYpempem  gyeo  sikA 
senea  wgnara  pe,    in   order  to  get  ynoney,  they   ivilfully  extorted 
money  from  the  people. 

Rem.  S.  A  (complex)  noun-sentence  before  the  postposition  nti,  form- 
ing with  it  an  adjunct  of  cause  (cf.  §255,  Gw.  275,  1  Hem.  2.),  which 
expresses  a  circumstance  of  purpose,  we  ha-\e  also  in  the  following 
proverb : 

Yepe  a  yebehu  nti   na  yekyekyere  boa,  in  order  that  we  may  find 
(a  thing)  when  we  wi.'ih  (it),  we  tie  hundles. 

Ahhreviated  Sentences  of  Purpose. 

280.  1 .  A  contraction  of  the  princij)al  sentence  and  the  adverhial 
sentence  of  purpose  into  one  sentence  with  co-ordinate  verbs  takes  place, 
when  (in  the  case  mentioned  in  §  279,  1(/.)  the  conjunction  se  and 
the  subject  of  the  adv.  sent,  is  omitted. 

a.  'Y\\Q.  verb  of  the  adv.  sent,  is  joined  to  the  principal  sentence 
in.  co-ordination,  retaining  its  form.    E.  g. 

Prussifi)  asiesie  woi'iho   dedaw   rekgko  =  se   wgrekoko, 
the  I*russia)is  had  prepared  themselves  already  to  fight. 


§281.  COMPOUND  SENTENCES.  175 

h.  The  verb  or  verbs  of  the  adv.  sent,  is  or  arc  joiruMl  to  the  prin- 
cipal sentence  in  the  consecutive  form;  of.  §  2.'')0,  2.    E.g. 
Yebesiah  akoto  aduan'  aber6  wo, 

we  shall  r/o  down  to  hwj  food  for  thee. 
N'asuafo  ko  kurow  no    mil  akoto  nnuan', 

Ills  discijjles  icere  gone  away  unto  the  city  to  huy  meat.  John  •1,  8. 
Meko  niaba,  I  (JO  (with  the  intention)  to  retwrn  a(jai)i. 
Mesore  matee  me  mn,  1  rise  to  stretch  my  hack. 
Mesere  aduah'  madi.    Mesere  nsu  kakra  manom. 
Mihuam'  tcV  matie(or  mafwe)  se  eye  ana.    Meso  aduaiV  niafut-. 

Cf.  Riis,  Outline  d'c.    §  213,  3. 
C.  When  the  verb  of  the  principal  sentence  is  negative,  th;it  of  the 
adv.  sent,  (co-ordinate  to  the  former)  is  made  negative  too.    E.  g. 
A'fei  yenko  akura    iVkoto  hkesua  bio, 

now  ive  shall  no  more  go  to  the  village  to  huy  eggs. 
Yenntra  ho  nnye  cno  ho  akyinnye  adesae,    ive    shall   not  sit  there 

disj)iiting  ahoiit  that  until  evening  (or,  all  day). 
Obi  nnyaw'   asuteii  iVkom'im  otare,  (one  does  not  leave  i.  e.)  nohody 

leaves   a   flowing   water   (does   not  go  to   drink  i.  o.)   in  order  to 

drink  from  a  pool. 
2.  After  locative  verbs  implying  direction,  the  verb  of  the  adv.  sent, 
is  put  in  the  infinitive,  so  that  it  forms,  as  it  were,  a  locative  comjde- 
ment  to  the  principal  verb;  and  such  an  infinitive  of  a  transitive  verb 
is  preceded  by  its  object,  as  if  it  were  an  attribute  in  the  possessive; 
case,  or  forms  a  compound  with  it.  Cf.  §  1  26.  208,  4.  E.g. 
Wgkoo  afow,  ifiey  went  a-foraging. 

Okoo  aburow'  to  =  gkoe  se  grekgtg  aburow',   Jie  went  to  buy  corn-. 
Masoma  no  nkoko  to  =  se  ofikgtD  hk.,  /  sent  him  to  buy  fowls. 
Aduantg  na  yebae  =  yebae  se  yebeto  aduan',   we  came  to  buy  food. 
[Ycbaii  \vk  betoo  aduaii'  (Gen.  43,  30)    expresses  that  they  obtained 

tlieir  purpose :  ive  came  here  (and)  bought  food.] 
Onipa  ba  no  amma  ammesee  nnipa  k^ira,  na  oljcgyt'c  won.   Lnlc.  .9,  56'. 


CHAPTER   ill. 
Manifold  Compound  Sentences. 


3S1.  Of  co-ordinate  principal  sentences  (§  249-2.53),  more  titan 
tu)0  may  be  joined  togetlier  in  the  one  or  other  way  {copiidative,  or 
adversative,  or  causative,  or  illative),  and  any  of  them  may  be  com- 
plex.   E,  g. 

Bereye  ye  nnfida,  na  ahoofe  ye  ahuhude;  obea  a  osuro  Yehowa  na 
wobeyi  no  aye.    PrOV.  ,31,  SO. 

Wo,  forbear  giving  many  fxain])les,  as  they  would  not  present  any  new  leatiircs, 
lint  onlv  eoniltinatiiins  of  sueli  as  have  lieen  treateil  of  ah'eady. 


176  SYNTAX.  -282  § 

In  reviewing  the  various  combinations  in  the  subsequent  paragraphs, 
we  mark  the  principal  sentences  by  the  capital  h'tters  A  for  indepen- 
dent or  copulatively  co-ordinate  sentences,  ]i  fur  adversati\'e,  and  (^ 
I'or  causative  or  ilhxtiA-e  sentences. 

UcS!2.  Any  principal  sentence  may  have  tiro  or  more  ^iuhord/ixifr 
sentences,  not  only  of  the  same  kind,  but  also  of  diiTcrent  kinds,  as 
described    in  §  254-280. 

We  shall,  in  §  282-284,  mark  the  tioun-sentenres  by  n,  the  (idjurtirc 
sentences  by  h,  and  the  different  kinds  of  udvcrhial  sentences  by  c. 
When  a  sentence  is  interrupted  by  the  insertion  of  another,  we  mark  it 
twice  by  the  same  letter,  before  and  after  the  insertion,  with  the  addi- 
tion of  a  hyphen  after  and  before  the  letter,  to  indicate  that  other  mem- 
bers of  the  sentence  are  found  after   or  !)efore  the  intervening   words. 

We  distinguish  several  cases  : 

1.  Two  or  more  subordinate  sentences  of  the  same  k/'nd  belong  to 
the  same  principal  sentence  or  the  same  single  member  of  it.  In  this 
case  they  are  co-ordinate  among  themselves,  and  connected  by  the 
copulative  conjunction  na  or  the  disjunctive  conj.  anase;  the  par- 
ticles introducing  or  ending  them,  are  generally  put  only  once  (the 
particle  se  may  occasionally  be  repeated);  but  the  relative  part,  'a', 
connecting  an  adjective  sent,  with  any  member  of  a  principal  (or  of 
a  subordinate)  sentence,  may  be  repeated  with  every  new  adjective 
sentence,   instead  of  the  conj.  n  a.    E.g. 

K()bisa,  no  se  obekg  afum  anase  obetra  ofie,  (fo  (and)  ask  Jii/n  wliv- 
ther  he  ivill  go  to  the  plantation  or  stay  at  home.  (A  a  a.) 

Okraman  a  obae  'nera  na  wopam'  no  no,  wasan  aba,  the  dofi  that 
came  yesterday  and  ivas  driven  away,  has  come  ayain.  (A-  h  h,  -A.) 

AFagya  ma  me  kwan  na  me  ho  ye  me  den  a,  mekg  Ogua,  when  my 
father  yires  me  ieave  and  1  urn  well,  1  shall  yo  to  Cape  Coast,  (c  c.  A.) 

Wuuni  na  na  woko  obi  fi  ag«jru,  na  otu  ne  mma  fo  a:  wode  tu  wo 
ho  bi,  if  thon  hast  no  mother  and  yoest  into  one's  house  to  jjlay 
and  site  yires  her  children  an  adnionition,  thou  takest  it  for  thy- 
self also.    Prov.  {c  c  c,  A.) 

Anantwi  l\  vv^on  ho  ye  tan  na  woafomfou  no  dii  asiu'i  a  won  ho  ye 
fe   na   won  ho   tixa   won  ho  no.    Cen.  41,  4.    (A-  h  h  -A  h  h.) 

Obea  bi  a  ne  din  de  Lidia  a  otgh  tankoko'  a  ofi  Tiatira  kiircnv  mu 
a  olere  Nyankopon  tee.    Acts  16,  14.    {A-  h  h  h  h  -A.) 

2.  Two  or  more  subordi)iate  sentewes  of  different  kinds  (k.  h.  c.) 
may  belong  to  the  same  principal  sentence.    E.  g. 

Oni'pa  reba  a.    wonse  no   se:   bera, 

nhen  a  man  is  coming,  you  do  not  hid  him  rome.    (c,  A:  a.) 
Milinfi  no  no,   miguane,   eiise  misuroe, 

uhen  1  saw  liim,  1  jled,  herause  J  was  afraid,    (r,  A,  c.) 
Nneema  yi  rei'i  ase   aba  k,   nioiifwc  osoro  lui  momma   mo  ti  so,   efise 

mo   gye   rebi-ti.    Luk.  21,  28.    (c,  A  A,  c.) 


§   2H2,  2H3.  MANIFOLD    COMPOUND    SENTENCES.  177 

3.  A  mihordinalc  sentence  may  have  another  aenlemx  suhordinate 
to  it,  and  tlie  latter  again  another.  We  mark  the  distance  from  the 
principal  sentence  by  adding  the  figures  -,  •',  for  the  second  and  third 
degree,  the  first  degree  wanting  no  such  distinction.    E.  g. 

Eye  me  so,  onom  ramorosa  da  nti,  n'adwenem"  asee,  it  seems  to  me 
that  his  senses  are  deranped  because  he  is  always  drinking  rn/m. 
(A,  C-,  a.) 

Ahofra  a  okura  nhoma  a  efi  Aburokyi'ri  no  bae  no,  mibisdano  se 
ofi  Osn  ana?  ifiJien  the  hoy  tvith  the  letters  from  Europe  came, 
1  ashed  him,  tvhethcr  he  tvas  from  Christianshorg.  (c-  h-  h'-^  -c,  A  a.) 

Filrao  bisa  mo  se:  Mo  ddwuma  ne  den?  a,  munse  no  se:  Wo  nkuA 
ye  nimoafwefo  fi  yen'  mmofraase  d6  bedii  'ne :  —  na  moatril  Gos^n 
asase  so,  irhen  Pharao  asks  you  saying :  ivhat  is  your  occupation, 
{then)  tell  him  saying :  Thy  servants  are  shepiherds  from  our  youlh 
■unlil  no IV :  that  ye  may  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen.  Gen.  46,33.34. 
(c:  a'^,  A:  a: - c.) 

Se  mi'ihu  Yervisalem  se  dom  atwa  ho  ahyia  a,  cno  na  muhii  se  ne 
bo  abeh.    Lnli.  21,  20.    (c  a',  A  a.) 

Ese  nea  oba  Onyankupnn  nky^h  no  se:  ogye  di  se  owo  ho  na  oye 
won   a  wofwefwe  n'akyi  kwah  no  katuafo.   Ileh.  11,  6.  (A  h:  a  rt" 

3.S3.  A  succession  of  well  arranged  sentences  forming  one  whole, 
especially  when  a  concatenation  of  subordinate  sentences  is  embodied 
in  it,  is  called  a  period.  In  every  period  there  is  a  multipartite  for- 
mer part,  which  is  completed  by  the  apodosis. 

Instead  of  entering  into  the  different  kinds  of  manifold  compound 
sentences  and  periods,  we  only  point  out  some  passages  from  the  Bible, 
containing  such,  and  indicate  the  different  sentences  according  to  §  281. 
282.,  together  with  their  jDunctuation,  and  showing,  by  the  sign  j  ,  where 
the  apodosis  of  the  period  begins. 

Se  nyansa  ba  wo  komam  na  ohu  so  wo  kTira  ani  a,  ||  adwempa  be- 
fwe  wo  so,  na  ntease  abo  wo  ho  ban.    Prov.  2, 10.    (c  c,  A,  A.) 

Frov.  1  (v. 24)  c,  c,  c,  c,  (25)  c,  c;  II  (21])  A;  c,  A. 
(v.  27)  c  c,  c:  II  (28)  A,  B;  A,  IB; 

(v.  29)  C,  C,   (30)   C  C:\\(31)  A,  A.   (32)    C\  C.   (33)   B,  B. 

Prov.  2  (v.  1)  A-,  c  c,  (2)  c  a:  (3)  c  c,  (4)  c  c:  \\  (S)  -A,  A.  (O)  C,  C. 
Ps.  107  (v.  10)  A-hh:   (ii)  c'^  c'^,   (i2)  h,h,h:   (is)  h,  h;   (u)  b,  b:\\ 
(v.i5)  -A:  (Hi)  c,  c. 

Whilst  these  7  verses  are  only  one  principal  sentence  in  the  form  of  a  ])erio(l, 
the  former  part  of  which  is  huilt  up  of  I)  adjective  sentences,  the  following  <j  ami 
10  verses  form  periods  of  similar  content,  Imt  which  are  Iniilt  up  of  10  and  16 
'principal  sentences. 

Ps.  107  (v.  17)  A;  (IS)  A  A:  (19)  A,  A:,  (20)  A  A:  \\  (21)  A,  (22)  A,  A. 

Ps.  107  (v.  23)  A-  h  h,  (24)  -A:  (25)  A  a,  a;  (26)  A  A,  A;  (27)  A,  A; 

(v.2S)  A,  A,  (29)  A  a  a;  (So)  Ac,  Ah:\\  (31)  A,  (32)  A,  A. 

Vs.  1  (v.i)  A  h,  h,  h:  (2)  h,  b:  \\  (3)  A  h  h,  b;  A-  h  -A.  (4)  B:  B  h. 

(v.  5)  C,  C.  ((J)  c,  e. 

12 


178  APPENDIX  I.  §  284.  285. 

2.S4.  Not  only  suhordmaie,  especially  adjective,  sentences  are  often 
found  inserted  between  the  members  of  other  (principal  or  subordinate) 
sentences,  but  principal  (and  even  complex  and  co-ordinate)  sentences 
also  may  be  thrown  in  hctween  the  parts  of  another  sentence,  inter- 
rupting their  connection.  'J'hey  arc  lasually  put  in  parenthesis ',  some- 
times the  dash  is  used  before  and  after  such  a  sentence,  instead  uf 
the  parenthesis. 

Se  meko  m'agya  nkyeh    na   abofra   yi    nka  yen  ho  a,  (nso  ne  k;ira 

fam  abofra  yi  de  ho,)  ebeba  se:   se  ohu  se  abofra  yi  hka  yen  ho 

a,  obewu.    Gen.  44,  30.31.  (c  c,  (A,)  A  a-:o'  a^,  -a.) 

Cf.  Lute.  1,  55.  70.  23, 51.  Joli.  6,  23.   Acts  1,  15. 12,  3. 13, 8.    liom.  4,  17.  7, 1. 

1  ( 'or.  8, 1—3.  9,  21.    ( 'ol.  4, 10.   Ilch.  7, 11. 19.  20-22.  9, 1—12. 12,  20.  2  /. 

1  Joh.  1, 2.  3  Joh.  1.  5. 


APPENDIX  I. 
On  Subjects  connected  with  Orthography. 

A.   PUNCTUATION. 

2H*i»  We  may  comprise  the  main  princij)les  of  pnni'tnation  in 
some  simple  rules. 

1,  The  parts  of  a  simple  sentence,  subject,  predicate,  complements 
and  adjuncts,  being  either  simple,  or  enlarged  by  attributes  or  by 
adjective  sentences,  are  not  separated  from  each  other  by  any  point 
whatever,  except  the  following  cases: 

a.  When  such  a  member  is  put  at  the  head  of  the  sentence,  for 
the  sake  of  emphasis  ov  perspicuiti/,  and  is  not  followed  by  na,  it 
is  usually  marked  off  by  a  comma,  espec.  when  the  emphatic  and 
restrictive  particle  de  is  used  with  it  (vn  de,  on'  de,  me  de,  won  de). 
The  comma  may,  however,  be  omitted,  when  the  sentence  is  short 
and  the  sense  plain  without  it.    Examples  see  §  247.  201 ,  5. 

&.  The  vocative  is  stopped  off  by  a  comma.  Many  interjections  also 
have  comma  (or  note  of  exlamation)  after  them. 

c.  Nouns  in  apposition  are  in  some  cases  separated  from  each  other 
by  a  comma.    §  190,  4. 

2.  In  contracted  sentences, 

a.  co-ordinate  suhjects,  complements  or  adjuncts  are  separated  from 
each  other  by  a  comma,  as  far  as  they  are  not  connected  by  the  conj. 
ne;  §  245,  1.  3-5.  cf.  Gen.  10.  25, 15.  32,  M.  15.  Exod.  1,  2-4.  20, 10. 

h.  complements  or  adjuncts  of  different  kinds  are  usually  not  separa- 
ted from  each  other  by  points.    §  246,  3. 


§  285.  PUNCTUATION.  179 

3.  Co-ordinate  principal  sentences  are  separated 

a.  by  a  comma,  when  they  are  simple  and  shorty  and  copulative 
or  adversative  to  each  other,  connected  hy  the  conjuuc  lions  na,  nan  so, 
nso;  §250,251. 

h.  by  a  semicolon,  wh(!n  they  are  enlarged,  especially  when  the  one 
or  the  other  is  complex;  when  tliey  are  co-ordinate  ivillioid  a  con- 
junction; when  the  co-ordination  of  three  or  more  sentences  \b  parlbf 
copidalive  and  par tl/j  adversative  (§281);  a.\so  hefore  illative  conjunc- 
tions (§252); 

c.  by  a  colon,  when  the  succeeding  sentence   is  explanatory  to  the 

preceding,  or  when,    after  several  copulative  sentences,   one   or  more 

sentences   are  illative   or    adversative,    stating  a  reason,   inference  or 

consequence,  or  a  strong  contrast. 

The  fi'dicral  principle  tliat  regulates  the  choice  of  either,  is  the  closeness  of  the 
connection  between  the  parts  of  the  compound  sentence.  —  Examples  are  oasilj^  found 
in  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  (chap.  1() — 29)  and  in  proverbs  of  the  natives  (cf  Primer 
for  the  Vernac.  Schools  in  Akuap.,  1872,  pag.  4i) — 58. 

4.  Suhordinate  sentences,  precedinij  the  principal  one : 

a.  Adverbial  sentences  having  a,  no,  yi,  at  the  end,  are  separated 
by  a  comma,  when  they  are  siufile  or  not  more  than  two  (§  2G2-265,  1), 
and  by  a  colon,  when  they  arc  three  or  more. 

h.  Adv.  sentences  having  nti  at  the  end,  are  usually  stopped  off 
by  a  comma.    §  275,  1. 

5.  Suhordinate  sentences,  succeedimj  the  principal  one : 

a.  Noun-sentences  introduced  by  se  (that),  either  have  not  an  if  point 
before  them,  espec.  when  they  are  simple  or  short ;  or  they  have  a 
comma,  or  better  a  colon,  before  them,  which  is  inserted  after  se,  — 
when  the  noun-sentence  is  of  a  wider  extent,  or  of  a  complex  nature. 
§  255,  \h.  2.  3&.  6.  256  Bern. 

h.  Noun-sentences  introduced  by  se,  or  direct  quotations,  have  a 
colon  before  them  (after  se);  but  if  the  quotation  is  indirect,  no  point 
is  used.    E.  g.  Asum  wo :  soa  me  (Prov).  §  255,  3. 

c.  Noun-sentences  or  adverhicd  sentences  introduced  by  se  or  senea 
{=hoid)  have  not  any  point,  or,  at  the  most,  a  comma,  before  them. 
§  255,  5.  268.  270. 

d.  Adverbial  sentences  introduced  by  ansa-na,  na  .  .  ansa,  besi  se, 
kosi  se,  may  have  a  comma  before  these  compound  conjunctions,  or 
not.    §266,1.2.265,2. 

e.  Adv.  sentences  introd.  by  efise,  esiane  se,  se,  or  by  n  a  with  the 
verb  in  the  consecutive  form,  have  a  comma  before  them;  before  the 
consecutive  n  a,  however,  it  is  often  omitted.  §  275,  2.  271),  2.  Before 
se,  introducing  an  adverb,  sentence  of  purpose,  the  comma  is  omitted, 
because  the  little  pause  in  speaking  is  rather  after,  than  before  it.  §  279,1. 


180  APPENDIX  I.  §  285. 

G.  Adjective  sentences,  joined  to  the  subject  or  to  any  other  noun 
or  proiioun  in  the  midst  or  at  the  end  of  a  sentence,  are  not  marked 
oft'  by  any  point.    §  257.  64.  65. 

7.  Suhordinale  sentences,  co-ordinate  among  themselves,  are  separa- 
ted from  each  other  only  by  the  comma.,  and  even  this  is  omitted, 
when  they  are  simple  and  short  and  connected  by  the  conj.  na,  or 
when  in  a  snccession  of  adjective  sentences  tlie  relaiive  particle  'a'  is 
repeated.    §282,1. 

8.  The  note  of  inten'Ofjation  is  used  at  the  end  of  interrogative 
sentences  with  direct  questions,  whether  they  be  independent,  or  form- 
ing part  of  another  sentence  (as  subordinate  noun-sentences  standing 
in  the  place  of  an  object).  §  153.  E.  g. 

Wobisa  me  se:  Ne  din  de  den?  a,  den  na  mi'nse  won?  ivlien  they 
ask  me,  What  is  his  name  ?  what  shall  1  say  unto  them  ?  Exod.  3, 13. 

9.  The  note  of  exclamation  is  used 

a.  after  many  interjections,  §  144-147. 

h.  after  vocatives,  Avheu  the  enclitic  e  (§  144)  is  appended,  and 
when  a  sentence  spoken  to  the  addressed  person  does  not  closely  follow. 

c.  after  an  optative  sentence,  §151. 

d.  after  direct  iynper alive  sentences,  §  152,  espec.  when  they  are 
short  or  uttered  with  some  affection,  not  in  the  quiet  way  of  instruction. 

e.  after  exclaynatory  sentences,  §15.']. 

Hem.  The  note  of  exdamalion  may  also  be  used  in  an  ohjective 
noun-sentence  inserted  into  another;  e.g.  Usee  won  se :  mini!  no,  wo- 
pinii  nkyirinkyiri,  na  wofwefwee  ase.    Jolt.  IS,  0. 

10.  The  fid  I  stop  is   used 

a.  at  the  close  of  a  complete  sentence  (when  no  note  of  interrogation 
or  of  exclamation  takes  its  place); 

h.  after  ahhrevialions  of  single  Avords,  also  aft(>r  jiyures  standing 
for  ordinal  numerals;  e.g. 

Afe  1873.  Yan.  9.  Napoleon  Til.  wui  =  afe  a  eto  so  apem  ahanwotwe 
aduoson-abiesa  mu  Yanuari  da  a  etia  akron  no  so.  Napoleon  a  oto 
so  abiesa  no  wui. 

11.  The  parenthesis  (  )  is  used  a.  to  mark  a  sentence  throivn  in 
between  the  parts  of  anotlier  sentence,  neither  necessary  to  the  grammar, 
nor  to  the  accuracy  of  the  sense  (§284);  1).  to  add  an  explanation 
or  equivalent  of  the  expression  after  which  the  parenthesis  is  inserted. 

1 2.  Brackets  [  ]  indicate  a.  a  parenthetic  sentence,  which  occasionally 
may  contain  another  parenthesis  in  curves,  or  which  is  contained  within 
such  other  parenthesis;  h.  explanations  or  equivcdents  of  single  expres- 
sions; c.  in  the  Tshi  Bible  also  words  not  contained  in  the  Hebrew 
or  Greek  text,  but  inserted  in  the  translation  for  the  sake  of  distinctness. 


§  285.  286.  PUNCTUATION.    CAPl'J'AL   LETTERS.  181 

IH.  "^riie  dash  in  made  use  of  in  various  ways: 

a.  it  marks  a  sudden  hreak  or  transUioH ; 

h.  it  marks  an  uucxpcried  or  an  ewjihali';  pause; 

C.  it  marks  a  considerahle  jiausc,  greater  than  tlic  stops  used  recjuire; 

d.  it  is  used  before  and  after  a  jjiireiUhcsis,  instead  of  the  curves 
or  brackets  in   11.  and   12.  §2.SL 

e.  heiween  two  mimhers  it  represents  \\w  numbers  tliat  intervene. 

Some  other  marks  used  in  writing  and  printing  are  the  following: 

14.  The  apostrophe  (')  is  used  to  indicate  the  elision  of  one  or 
more  letters  of  a  word. 

15.  I'he  quotation  points  ("  "  and  '  ')  mark  words  as  quotations. 
The  single  quotation  points  are  used  to  mark  oft"  a  quotation  ivithin 
a  quotation,  or  a  quotation  in  sense,  but  not  in  exact  words,  or  a  single 
unconnected  word  or  letter. 

16.  The  hyphen  (-)  is  used  to  connect  loosely  compounded  words 
(§  30,  2),  to  divide  a  word  into  syllahles  (§  23.  24.),  and,  when  placed 
at  the  end  of  a  line,  it  shows  that  one  or  more  syllables  of  a  word 
are  carried  to  the  next  line. 

17.  The  ellipses  ( — )  or  (.  .  .)   mark  the  omission  of  letters  or  words. 

18.  The  hyphen,  or  the  dasli,  or  the  double  quotation  pmnts  are 
also  put  when  words  or  figures,  that  stand  above  them,  are  to  he 
repeated  or  understood.  —  In  hymns  the  mark  :,:  shows  that  the  word 
or  words  precediny  it  in  the  same  line,  or  the  words  included  between 
two  such  marks,  are  to  he  repeated. 

19.  'Vhe  parayraph  or  section  (§)  marks  the  smaller  divisions  of  a 
hook  or  cliapter.  —  In  the  Bible  the  sign  ^[  is  used  to  mark  the 
commencement  of  a  new  sidjject. 

20.  The  asterisk,  or  little  star  (*),  and  the  ohelisk,  or  dayyer  (f), 
or  doublings  of  the  two,  and  the  parayraph  or  section  (§  or  ^),  are 
used  as  marks  of  reference. 

B.   CAPITAL  LETTERS. 

3<^6.  The  use  of  larye  or  capital  letters  in  Tslii  is  more  restricted 
than  in  English.  We  employ  them  at  the  beginning  of  the  following 
words : 

1.  The  first  word  of  every  book,  chapter,  letter,  note,  or  any  other 
piece  of  writing,  but  not  necessarily  the  first  word  in  every  line  of  poetry. 

2.  The  first  word  after  a  full  stop,  also,  after  a  note  of  interrogation 
or  ex^ilanation,  when  the  sentence  before,  and  the  one  after  it,  are 
independent  of  each  other. 

3.  The  first  ivord  of  a  direct  quotation,  excepting  very  short  ones 
that  stand  in  the  place  of  an  object  or  are  inserted  in  another  sentence 


182  APPENDIX  I.  §287. 

Onihafo  se:  okyena  meye,  the  slu()()ard  says,  To-morrow  1  shall  do  it. 
Mise  m'akoa  se:  ye  eyi!  a,  gye.    Lu1c.7,8. 

4.  Every  proper  name  (of  persons,  places,  streets,  rivers,  ships, 
mountains,  days,  months,  &c.) ;  also  common  nouns  when  personified. 

Hem.  1.  In  the  second  part  of  imperfect  compounds  (§  30,  2)  a 
small  letter  may  suffice;  e.  g.  Nord-amerika,  New-york,  Betlehcm-yuda 
(Judg.  19,18.).  Harun-al-rasid.  On  the  contrary  we  write:  Yosua  bou- 
Nun,  W.  de-Graft,  Filip  d'Orleans,  Otto  von-13ismark. 

Hem.  2.  Names  of  Divine  persons,  that  are  taken  from  cominon 
nouns,  begin  with  capital  letters  only  when  they  have  no  attribute  in 
the  possessive  case  before  them.    E.  g. 

Agya  ne  Oba  ne  Hohhom  kronkron.  3Iat.  2S,  19. 

Yen  agya  Onyankopon,  God  our  Failier ;  Onyame  ba,  the  Son  of  God; 
m'awurade  ne  m'agyenkwri,  mj/  Lord  and  Saviour; 
abagye  hoiihom,  the  Spirit  of  adoplion.  Bom.  8, 15. 

5.  Every  noun  and  principal  word  in  the  titles  of  hooks  and  the 
heads  of  their  principal  divisions. 

C.  ABBREVIATIONS. 

387.  To  save  time,  space  and  trouble,  certain  well  known  and 
frequently  recurring  words  may  be  ahhreviated  in  writing.    E.  g. 

1.  ThG  2^>'oper  names  of  male  and  female  persons,  formed  from 
those  of  the  seven  days  of  the  iveek  (§  42,  4),  when  standing  before 
another  name;  viz.  Kws.  Kwdw.  Kwb.  Kwk.  Y.  Kf.  Kwm.;  Akos.  Adw. 
Ab.  Ak.  (Ya;)  Af.  Am.    Likewise  the  christian  names,  as  in  English. 

2.a.  The  narnes  of  the  days  of  the  tveeJc:  Kwsd.  Dwd.  Bd.  Wd.  Yd. 
Fd.  Md.  h.  The  European  names  of  the  months:  Yan(uari).  reb(ruari). 
Mar(si).  Apr(ili).  (Mai,  Yuni,  Yuli,  are  written  in  full.)  Aug(usti). 
Sept(embere).  Okt(obere).  Nov(embere).  Des(embere).  —  The  native 
names  of  the  months  are  not  much  known,  and  for  some  of  them 
different  names  are  used  by  different  persons. 

3.  Abbreviations  for  the  names  of  the  different  hooJcs  of  the  Bible, 
see  in  the  Primer  (Twi  Kenkan  Xhoma)  of  1872.  pag.  83. 

4.  Some  abbreviations  of  the  names  of  countries  and  towns,  and  at 
the  same  time  of  lancjuaffes  and  dialects,  see  in  §  292.  and  in  'a  Voca- 
bulary, English,  Tshi  (Asante),  Akra',  pag.  XXIV. 

5.  The  following  abbreviations  of  frequently  recurring  words  arc 
used  in  printed  books: 

Xfw.  =  ufweso,    example  (=  e.g.);  s.  =  se,  as;   a.  s.  =  anase,  or; 
e.  s.  =  euese,  that  is,  therefore;  n.  a.  =  ne  ade,  and  so  on; 
n.  bb.  =  ne  babi,  and  elsewhere;  u.  bn.  =  ne  biuom,  and  others. 

6.  Other  abbreviations  that  may  be  ado2)ted  in  writing,  we  leave  to 
the  ingenuity  of  the  writer  or  reader,  or  to  a  future  Vernacular  Grammar. 
E.  g:  Ilh.  Krkr.,  yn  agy.  Ony.  ba,  m'aw.  u    m'agyk.  §  286  B,em.  2. 


§288.289.  ORTHOEPY,    voktry.  183 

APPENDIX  II. 
On  Prosody  and  Kindred  Subjects. 

USS.  (1.)  a.  On  OUTIRJKPY,  as  to  tho  j)roiiunria(ion  oi'  letters, 
their  quantity,  and  tlie  accent  and  to)ie  ol'  syllables,  sec  §  2 — 22. 

h.  Eynphasis  is  given  to  some  particular  word  or  words  in  a  sen- 
tence not  so  much  by  tho  strcs.s  of  voice  laid  on  such  words  (because 
the  cniphatical  stress  would  oi'tcn  be  in  conflict  with  the  accent  and 
tones  inherent  in  tbe  words),  as  by  their  position  and  by  additional 
words.    See  §  247. 

C.  Pauses  or  Ilcsls,  i.  e.  cessations  of  the  voice,  shortly  interrup- 
ting the  How  of  speech,  in  some  cases  serve  to  give  emphasis ;  but 
usually  they  serve  to  distinguish  the  sense,  in  which  cases  they  are 
generally  indicated  by  points.    §  285. 

d.  Intonation.,  i.  e.  tbe  clMwfe  or  modulation  of  the  voice  in  ivliolc 
sentences  or  periods,  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  high  or  middle 
or  low  tones  inherent  in  everij  stjliahle  in  every  word  (§  25),  and,  as 
it  were,  includes  them  within  its  range,  so  that  e.  g.  in  the  heijinniiKj 
of  a  longer  sentence  or  complex  of  sentences,  those  alternate  tones, 
proportioned  to  each  other,  are  liiijlier  llirowiliOHt,  than  they  are  to- 
wards the  close.  Tim  diffcA-ant  passions  of  the  mind  also  are  expressed 
by  different  tones  of  the  voice,  or  by  the  more  or  less  forcible  utter- 
ance of  tbe  sounds. 

28«.  (2.)  NATIVE  FOETRY  mostly  consists  of  short  somis  of 
different  character,  either  mournful,  or  rejoicing,  confident  and  exulting, 
or  praising,  or  disparaging  and  defying,  or  historical,  descriptive  and 
didactic.  All  such  songs  are,  or  originally  were,  improvisations  at 
given  occasions.  The  facts  to  which  they  refer,  or  the  thoughts  con- 
veyed by  them,  are  often  rather  intimated  by  a  few  hints  or  merely 
touched    at,   than  bespoken  in   plain    w^ords.   Cf.  1  Sam.  18,  7 . 

Several  kinds  are  accompanied  by  drums  and  other  time-beating  or 
musical  instruments,  chanted  by  a  precentor,  and  repeated  or  respon- 
ded by  a  chorus.  In  playing  parties,  consisting  either  of  males  by 
themselves  or  of  females  by  themselves,  sitting  or  dancing  or  promena- 
ding,  many  songs  of  th(>  same  kind   may  be  used  in  succession. 

The  natives  distinguish  the  following  kinds  of  SOiif/s : 
Kwadwom,    onnibianianedwom,    dwaedwoni,   odaUudwom,    sankudwom, 
akurododwom,  agyemannare,  antorepira,   ebadwom   (nnwoiikoro)  n.  a. 

Two  short  specimens  of  native  songs  are  the  following: 

1.  Agyeman  Kofi  a  okokaa  iie  ko  te  ho; 

Akyeue,   mannyii  Kama  a,   anka  Asante  de  me  koe. 


184  APPENDIX  U.  §290.291. 

(This  song  refers  to  tlic  invasion  of  tlic  Asautes  in  1SG3,  to  the  kiiip;  of  Akem- 
Kotoku,  as  an  ori_<;inator  of  it,  and  to  the  king  of  Tuam  (Tantitw)  with  his  valiant 
captain  Uauia.) 

2.  Advlo'c!   :,:    :,:  Woko  aware  amma  iitinii!  :,:   o! 
Wo  abusua  awie  sil  o!  Adwo'c! 

0  Adyoiva!  Thou  liast  gone  io  murn/  hast  nol  come  soon  (i.e.  hast 
stayed  away  too  long);  thy  family  has  finished  dying  away  (has 
died  out  entirely)!  0  Adyowa! 
(This  son^  wai-ns  daughters  that  arc  married  abroad,  not  to  forget  tlu'ir  iauiiiy, 
as  Adyowa  aid.) 

Other  specimens  would  require  more  explanation  than  our  space 
admits.  I'eu  Christian  Fante  Songs  are  contained  in  our  Tshi  Hymn- 
book  of  1865,  and  the  native  tunes  of  the  two  first  of  them  are  found 
in  the  Tune-book  of  1860. 

Hem.  The  native  tunes  chiefly  consist  of  the  tones  inherent  to  the 
spoken  words,  but  raised  to  the  proper  height  for  singing,  and  varied 
according  to  the  tones  in  mere  sj)eaking  and  the  intonation  mentioned 
in  §  288  d.  The  following  may  serve  as  a  specimen  of  a  native  tune : 
8  5  6  6  6,  67855,  54345,  2343.  :,: 
The  fat  cyphers  ai'e  long  notes.  In  new  lines  repeating  the  tune  of  foregoing 
lines,  two  short  notes  may  stand  for  a  long  cue. 

290.  (3.)  VERSIFICATION  utter  the  analogy  of  that  in  English 
and  German,  with  accented  and  unaccented  (or  heavy  and  light)  sylla- 
bles in  Jambic,  Trochaic,  Dactylic  &c.  metres,  with  or  without  rhyme, 
does  not  meet  with  any  serious  obstacle  in  Tshi;  cf.  the  Hymns  No. 
1-230  in  the  Tshi  Hymnbook  of  1865.  But  the  application  of  the 
European  tunes  to  such  hymns  after  the  German  or  English  fashion 
is  often  adverse  to  the  tones  inherent  in  the  words,  and  the  endeavour 
to  avoid  such  conflicts,  renders  versification  with  regard  to  a  given 
tune  more  difficult  than  it  is  without  such  regards. 

!391.  (4.)  FiHETOIllC  is  cultivated  in  civil  and  criminal  lawsuits 
and  in  political  transactions,  most  of  them  being  held  in  public. — 
Pecidiar  phrases  and  euphemistic  expressions  are  employed  on  grounds 
of  politeness  or  superstition,  in  order  to  remove  apprehensions  and 
ill  omens,  or  to  mitigate  and  paralyze  the  hideousncss  or  atrocity  of 
notions  and  facts  or  deeds.  Proverbs  are  very  frequently  resorted  to, 
and  now  and  then  the  speaker's  view  of  the  matter  is  illustrated  by 
a  parable. 

The  foUoA^-ing  example  is  taken  fi-om  a  pubUc  report  of  several  hours'  lengih, 
delivered  by  Kwabcna  Kumi,  a  messenger  sent  by  Kwadade,  the  king  of  Akropong, 
to  Akra,  during  the  quarrels  of  the  English  with  the  people  of  Osu  and  La,  which 
led  to  the  bombardment  and  destruction  of  Osu  (under  Fort  Christ iansborg)  by  an 
English  man-of-Avai-,  in  1854. 

'Mibui'i  Kankanfo  ne  Enyiresifo  be  se:  "Dua  bi  si  sarcso  a  eho  reso 
nsia.  Na  Obobe  ka  kyeree  Twitoh  se:  ma  yehkgsa  ne  yare.  Na  Twi- 
toh  se:  dabi;  na  wogyaee.    Na  arikyr,   wokofVvc  dua  no  h,   enna  awii 


§  292.  293.  RHETORIC.  —  DIALECTS.  185 

a  oho  aye  t'ltfi  yi!  na  nnipa  bepee.  Na  wotwitwaa  ogya  iio  viici  no, 
oyi  fa  lia  a,,  6sc:  inauya  twitnii !  oyi  fa  ha  k,  osc  :  inaiiya  ohobe!  ua 
wode  kyekycrec  og}''''  *^"  baa  ofie.  AYodc  bac  no,  na  wgasai'i  ayiyi 
j::;ya  no  ko  'fie;  na  obobc  no  no  twitoh  no  gu  awiam',  cremomnioni. 
Na  Obobc  ka  kyerec  'J'witon  sc:  Asem  a  meka  niokyorce  wo  no  ni  ! 
Mcka  inekyeree  wo  se :  mil  yciikotg  adiirii  iikosa  Onyankycreii  yare  ; 
wuso:  (labi;  ennji  awu  aye  ogya,  na  wgde  yen  akyekyo;  na  woabesan 
yell  agu  a\viam\  na  woatase  ne  gya  no  kge."  —  Na  meka  mekyeree 
Kankanfo  se:  "Mun'nim  Osi'ifo  asem  yi  a,  se  ete  ni !"  —  Na  oyi  liyen 
mil  a,  na  watii  nsl  abere  me,  na  oyi  hyeh  mii  a,  na  watii  nsa  aberc 
mo.    Na  wose:    "Wo  asem  a  woka  yi,   woinmoa!"' 

'J  told  (lie  peojh  of  Dutch  and  English  Akra  a  jiarahlc  sai/ing:  "A  tree  was 
standing  in  the  wilderness,  and  water  teas  dropping  from  it.  And  (Jbohe  (a  kind 
of  wild  vine)  said  to  Tshitong  (a  plant  with  long  flexiblo  loaves  used  for  tying 
bundles):  Let  us  go  and  heal  its  si'kness.  But  Tshitong  said:  no;  so  they  left 
off.  But  it  did  not  last  long,  ichen  the  tree  was  looked  at,  it,  having  died,  had 
become  bleak  (or  bare,  deprived  of  the  bark  &c.),  and  men  came  and  found  it 
(in  seeking  for  fael).  And  lohen  they  had  finished  chopping  the  wood,  one,  taking 
this  way,  said:  I  have  got  a  tshitong;  another,  taking  that  way,  said:  I  have 
got  an  obohe;  and  they  bound  the  fuel  together  with  them,  and  took  (it)  home. 
When  they  had  brought  (it  home),  they  unloosened  (the  bundles)  and  took  the 
fuel  (by  pieces)  into  the  house;  but  the  obobe  and  the  tshitong,  lying  in  the  sun, 
shrivelled  together.  And  Obobe  spoke  to  Tshitong  saying:  This  is  the  matter  I 
told  Ihee  of!  I  told  thee:  Let  us  go  (and)  buy  medicine  to  heal  Onyangkyereng's 
sickness;  thou  saidst:  no;  so  it  has  died  and  bccoine  fuel,  and  we  hare  been 
used  for  tying  it;  then  we  have  been  loosened  and  cast  into  the  sun,  and  the 
fuel  has  been  taken  off.''  —  And  I  told  the  people  of  Dutih  Akra,  saying:  ''If 
yiiH  do  not  understand  the  matter  of  the  O.sn  people, —  that  is  it.''  And  one 
entering  (bis  dwelling)  brought  me  liqwjr,  and  another  entering  (his  dwelling) 
brought  me  liquor.  And  they  said:  "As  to  the  word  which  thou  sayest  ~  thou 
docst  not  lie!"  ■ — ' 


APPENDIX  III. 

A  Comparison  of  the  Leading  Dialects 
of  the  Tshi  Language. 


29!2.  The  following  comparison  will  .show  that  the  lilcrary  dialect 
of  Tshi,  based  on  the  dialect  spoken  at  Akropontf  the  capital  of  the 
Aliitapon  country,  stands  hetiveen  the  Alcan  dialects  (of  Akem  and 
Asante)  and  the  Fante  dialects,  following  the  former  more  in  the  initial 
sounds,  and  the  latter  more  in  the  terminations. 

Rem.  Since  the  literary  dialect  took  its  rise  and  has  boon  chiefly 
cultivated  at  Akropoiig,  wo  mark  it  by  the  abbreviation  Akr.  The 
names  Akan,  Akyem,  xisante,  Fante,    we  mark  by  Ak.  Aky.  As.   F. 

t203.  Dialectical  differences  are  found  both  in  fjrammatical  and 
lexisocjraphi:  points,   which  we  bring  under  the  following  twelve  beads. 


1 HG  APPENDIX  111.  §  293. 

1.  Tr((nsfor))U(f/oii  of  cowmoiii'iiff  con.sonanls-  of  .sictiis  t;ik(>s  jilacc- 
ill    the  lullowiiis;'  syllables  and    words. 

r^  Akr.    (te)     te       ti       (de)     dc     di       iic      ui ;        iic,  to  bc ;  iiu,  and; 
Ak.         ^        „        „  „  „        „        „         „  de  lu! 

y.  „       tsc,     tsi        „        ^\■/M   d//i      iiyc    nyi;      iiye  iiy<^- 

/>.  AUr.     so   §141,1.2.        asr§]i;).        asasi-^lOr,.        so  §  10  1'..  1 1'.). 
Aky.      „  j  asetj  (  asas(  o  (  soo 

As.         „  I  asc  I  asasc   (dadc)       j  so 

F.  so,   do  I  aso,   adc,         (  asasc,   dadc,  so,    do. 

I  adze         I  adadc,    dadzo 

C.  Akr.     (kwa)  two     t\vc     twi;    .i!,"iia:      A\\v     d\Vo      dCvi      dwo     dwii,  ,^^^ 
Aky.         „  „  „  „       dwa. ;         „  „  „  „  „       ^ 

As.  „  „         „  „       (d/fia;   dzfio    dzilo    dzu      dzo       d/u)    'v-^ 

F.  „        kwo   kwo     kwi;  gwa;      gwo      jiwo     gwi      gwio     j;"wi.     '^ 

(/.  Akr.     liiia,   liwa;      I'wc     IVvOj      two,      fwi,      liwi  j 

Ak.      tVva  „  „  „  „  „       §11.12. 

F.         liwa  liwc    liwe        „         liwi        „    ) 

C.  Akr.     wosaw     wura      awowa     yora     ycm    i 
Ak.       wosa         wira        awoba      liara     yeni      §  !*.». 
F.         wosaw     wura.      alioba.      yew      iiyoiii  i 
Akr.     (boil)       won       wg-      won;       yon        yo-        yi'" ;       J 
Ak.      (wen)     yene     ye-      yere ;      yene      ye-       ycre  §  •'^»"'^- 

F.  (liwon)  won  wg-  wore;  by  on  nyg-  nyere  \ 
Hem.  1.  Tbe  transformation  of  t,  d,  into  ts,  dz,  before  e,  i  (yet  not 
before  o),  is  of  recent  origin  and  does  not  seem  to  extend  to  all  Faiite 
dialects.  There  is  no  vestige  of  it  in  tbe  h[){)  words  of  the  Afutu  or 
Cape  Cape  Coast  dialect  of  'iQQd<,  given  by  W.J.  Millkr,  nor  in  the 
writings  of  Ch.  Frottcu,  1760.  The  Ji/iVVr.  and  Mr.  W.de  Graft 
have  it  throughout;  in  the  words  obtained  from  the  latter  by  the  llcv. 
J.lieccliam,  the  sounds  ts,  dz,  are  erroneously  expressed  by  (^i,  j.- — 
'J'hc  transformation  of  u  into  ny  before  e,  i,  was  not  known  to  Milller 
and  Frolten,  nor  is  it  found  in  the  words  of  dc  Graft;  but  the  Mf  Gr. 
extends  it  even  to  words  in  which  the  n  stands  for  an  original  d,  as 
in  lie,   aiul,    no,   to  he,    F.  nyc   (written   nyi    in  the  Mf.  Gr.). 

It  would  not  bring  any  advantage  to  the  literary  dialect,  if  ihesi- 
transformations  of  simple  into  comj)ound  consonants  wore  recoi\od 
in  it;  the  disadvantage,  on  the  contrary,  is  siugulary  apparent  in  the 
following  example: 

Akr.  ade,  a  tiling,  plur.  nnegma  (besides  ad  e  and  nnewa),  thiuijs; 

Ak.    ade,  adee,         ,,       nneema  (=;  nnee- mma); 

F.       adze  [adzij,        „       nnyc(e)ina  [ilZ/.  6r/*.  nyemba,    mb  =  mm]. 

In  Akr.,  n  nee  ma  appears  as  the  regular  plural  fcn-mation  of  Ak.  adee 

with  the  addition  of  the  diminutive  sufiix,  cf.  §  42,  2.  4.;   but  who  would 

recognize  the  singular  form  adze  [adzi]  in  the  plural  form  nnycm[bja'? 

Hem.  2.  In  the  words  under  ?>.,  not  even  those  Fante  dialects  that 

have  d  for  s,  use  it  consistently.  Akr.  a  so,  hottom,  in  F.  occurs  in  three 

forms,  ase  (so  it  was  in  1668  and  1760),  ade,  adze;  but  these  two 

last  forms  are  likely  to  be  confounded  with  ade,  adze,  a  thing. 


§293.  COMl'AUISON    OF    DIALECTS.  187 

F.  d  a  (I  z  e  =  Akr.  a  s  a  s  c,  (jround,  earth.,  is  not,  or  only  by  the  tone, 
distinguished  from  F.  d adze  =  Akr.  dade,  iron.  (Midler,  1G68,  has 
araddo  =  adade,  but  Proitcu,   17G0,   writes  it  asasc.) 

Hem.  3.  '\\\q,  compound  consonants  kw  and  gw  have  in  F.  been 
retained  throughfjut;  in  Ak.  and  Akr.  they  have  been  transformed 
into  tw,  d  \v,  before  e,  e,  i;  gw  has  been  transformed  also  before  'a' 
in  Ak.,  but  not  in  Akr.,  which  therein  occupies  an  intermediate  posi- 
tion between  Ak.  and  F.  —  Akr.  Ak.  twa  is  a  transformation  of  F.  kwia, 
71//'.  Gr.  khwa,  khwia,  de  Graft:  cliua,  to  cut  (ProUeii:  kya,  y  =  \vi). 
The  combinations  t  \V  e,  t  w  i,  d  w  e,  d  w  i,  with  the  final  w  (§5)  or  before  m, 
have  changed  into  two,  twu,  dwo,  dwu;  cf. 
Akr.  As.Dwoda  (=D  view  da),  Aky.  Dweada,  il//".  6r>\  Gwioda,  7^".Gioda  ; 
Akr.  Ak.   advvini,   odwumfo,  F.   agwiui,  gwimfo. 

Tiem.  4.  The  compound  consonants  hw  have  been  retained  in  F. 
and  transformed  into  f\v  in  Ak. ;  but  Akr,  sides  with  Ak.  only  before 
c,  e,  i,  and  with  F.  before  a  and  partly  before  e,  i  (especially  after 
the. nasal  prefix,  as  in  nhwea,  sand,  iihwi,  hair). 

Hem.  5.  The  labial  consonant  w  has  been  palatalized  before  e,  e,  i 
(§10,2),  and  in  Ak.  it  has  even  been  transformed  into  y,  in  the 
pronoun  of  the  3d  pers.  plur.  (^  bS  ReJH.  2) ,  whilst  on  tlie  contrary 
Akr.  and  F.  have  retained  the  consonant  as  purely  labial,  and  trans- 
formed the  palatal  vowels  into  labial  ones,  in  the  said  pronoun  (§  58) 
and  in  wosaw,  wura,  wu  si  w  =  \vesa,  Avira,  wisie,  §19.  In  Ak. 
yawa,  Akr.  F.  awowa,  hrass,  an  original  y  seems  to  be  transformed 
into   \v. 

Hem.  G.  The  palatal  simple  consonant  y  of  Akr.  and  Ak.  has  been 
transformed  in  F.  either  into  by  or  h,  or  into  ny,  in  the  })ronoun  of 
the  1st  pers.  plur.  (§58);  the  latter  transformation  is  also  found  in 
the  verb  yeni,  Akr.  Ak.,  nyem,  F.,  to  conceive.  In  the  verb  yera, 
to  be  lost,  Akr.  has  the  commencing  consonant  as  it  is  in  F.  (yew), 
and  the  termination,   as  it  is  in  Ak.  (bar a). 

2.  Variation  of  the  vowels  and  especially  the  final  S07inds  and 
stjUahles  of  stems  is  frequent,  so  that  we  find  the  variations  of  simple 
stems  recorded  in  §  28,  3.  interchanging  within  the  same  dialect  or 
in  different  dialects.  We  shall  now  review  those  ten  forms  or  variations, 
mentioning  the  cases  in  which  the  three  compared  dialects  agree  or 
differ,  and  then  subjoining  some  examples  under  a — 0. 

Variation  1  (pa)  in  all  dialects  numbers  more  stems  than  any  of 
the  variations  2-10.  In  some  verbs  which  in  Akr.  have  full  e  or  o, 
we  find  in  Ak.  e,  e  or  o  for  it  a).  Ak.  has  more  verbs  with  one  simple 
vowel  than  F.  and  Akr.,  because  Ak.  omits  the  final  w  of  ?;ar.  ^('9>  i'^ 
two  verbs  the  final  m  of  var.  5(9),  and  in  other  words  tlie  accessory 
syllables  of  var.  7(0;  on  the  other  baud  it  iises  accessory  syllables 
(var.  7)  where  Akr.  and  sometimes  also  F.  have  single  vowels ^'^. 

Nouns  in  e,  i,  o,  u,  iu  Ak.  frequently  assume  the  additional  vowels 
e,  e,  0,  0,   of  car.  6'). 


1H8  APPENDIX  ill.  §293 

V((r.3  (p-ivv)  is  peculiar  to  F.  (as  early  as  16(58)  and  Akr.  In  Ak. 
it  is  diii'Hy  replaced  by  'imr.  1  or  7  in  verbs  and  nouns  <9,  ^'i'  •il'^o 
l)y   rar.  6  (confined   to  nouns)';). 

Var.  3  and  i  (pa,  pae)  in  verbs  are  used  nearly  alike  in  Akr. 
Ak.  and  l'\;  some  interclianges,  however,  take  place/',).  In  nouns,  Akr. 
has  (iften  tlie  a  of  contracted  (liniiiiiitive  I'orins,  when'  Ak.  and  V.  slill 
use  incontracted   t'ornis.9. 

Vai'.  5  (pam,  pan).  Akr.  has  many  verbs  and  nouns  ending  in  11 
(and  a  few  ending  in  m)  instead  of  accessory  syllables  of  var.  7  in 
Ak. ;/)  Akan  has,  therefore,  less  verbs  and  nouns  ending  in  m  and  n 
or  n,  tlian  Akr.,  but  F.  has  morc  verbs  and  nouns  ending  in  n  (lOdS 
and  1760  we  find  n),  and  besides  (lieni,  it  has  ninny  ending  in  r  or  1, 
which  in  Akr.  and  Ak.  have  the  accessory  syHablcs  of  var.  7  and  8.^^^) 

Var.  6  (pi a)  is  pretty  much  alike  in  Akr.  Ak.  F.,  as  far  as  vcrhs 
arc  concerned  ;  but  accessory  vow(ds  in  iiuuHS  are  more  frequent  in 
Ak.,   cf.  var.  l^')i    and  some  exchanges  take  place  witli  ix(r.  3.  7.8.'') 

Var.  7  (pare,  pini)  is  more  frerjuent  in  Ak.  than  in  Akr.,  and 
more  frequent  in  Akr.  tlian  in  F.  (cf.  rctr.  7.  5.);  in  some  cases  the 
^owels  only  are  different^.  In  Ak.  the  iinal  vowed  may  assume  an 
additional  vowel  (which  sometimes  supplants  the  former  so  that  the 
form  belongs  to  var.  8,  as  in  akyire,  adurc)),  whilst  in  Akr.  th(; 
accessory  syllable  may  assume  a  fnial  w;  but  in  F.  more  frc(|uenlly 
the  final  vowel  of  tlie  accessory  syllable  is  lost,  and  then  the  foru), 
ending  in  r  or  1,  rather  belongs  to  var.5^).- — Sometimes  Ak.  has 
var.  1  or  5  or  6  instead  of  Akr.  var.  7^). 

Var.  8  (para,  pira)  is  used  nearly  alike;  Ak.  has  some  forms 
equivalent  to  var.  7  in  Akr.  and  F.  (as  akyire,  aduro,  ha\'e  been  men- 
tioned under  var.  7  in  parenthesis),   but  the  reverse  also  takes   phice"';)- 

Var.  9  and  10  (pata,  patiriw)  are  used  nearly  alike,  with  f(nv 
interchanges '').  — 

Examples  of  the  said  deviations  of  Ak.  and   F.  from  Akr. 

a.  Akr.    ye     gye     se     dwo  edwom 

Ak.      ye     gye     se     dwo  edwdm 

F.        ye     gye     se     gwe  (?) 

1).   Akr.    siia        kyc  ehe  fi         kyi  mmobo        du        hu 

Aky.    siiere    kyere  ehene       iiri       kyiri  mmoboro    duru    hunu 

As.       sua       kye, kyere  he, bene  firi      kyi  mmoboro    duru    hfi,hunu 

F.         siiare    k)  ere  ehene      fi,  firi  mmobore    du         hu 

6'.    Akr.    ade     dote       ofi,ofie  ayi    cwi     obo  osgfo     so,         nsu     own 

Aky.  ladee   nnotee  ofie         'i^yie  ewio  oboo  osofoo    soo       nsuo  owuo 

As.      jade  obo  osofo     so  nsu 

F.         adze  detse      efi,efie  ayi    ewi     ebo  sgfo     do,  so    nsu     ewu 


§  293.  COMPARISON    OF    DIALECTS.  189 

d.  Akr.  saw  dew  tew  siw  fow  gow  tow  fiiw  suw  hew  kyew 
Ak.  sa  de  te  si  f'o  gono  to  i'li  siini  ht-rc  kyea 
F.  =  Akr. 

e.  Aki".    nwaw     ckyew     ehyew     csiw     asow     af'uw;     eyaw 
Ak.      riwa        ekye        ehyee      csin       aso        aluo        eya 
F.  =  Akv.  yow 

f.  Akr.  ta  babi  ta  ka  akura  oiiya  da 
Ak.  te  beabi  tawa  kawa  akuvowa  onyina  dfi 
F.                             etaba  (iggS)    kaba      akiiroba       cbina        ilaba 

(J.   Akr.    dan       kyi'i'i     sen    kyiu  ton;  oman    abcn     ediii    gijoii     <'biin 

Aky.jdanc     kyeno  s<*uc  kyiiii  toiio  omane  abeiic  edini   epono  cbmiii 
As.     I  (dare)  edin  (eporo) 

F.         dan  „       sfu    kyin  ton     einan     alu'n     cdzin  ejton      cbnn 

Akr.     osram,  gbusoni;  nini         kum 

Aky.   osrane,  |ni  (ku 

As.  „  obosome  Inini        iknni 

F.         gsran    (WGS)     bosom  uyim      kum 

h.  Akr.  tee  gbea  afoa  amoa  i.  Akr.  sare  adare 

Aky.  tene  gbii  afjina  amanfi  Ak.  sere  adere 

As.  ,,  „  afora  amera  As.  ^  „ 

F.  tsen  (basia)  afona  amona?  F.  adar 

h.   Akr.     twori     bore     atere      akyiri        goru      osoro      ndnru 

Aky.        „  „         atog      (akyirie    )go  „        (aduruo 

As.  „  „  I  aky  ire     Igorg  „        jaduro 

T-,  ,  11       latere     akyiri       eux        esoro      adur 

F.         kwer     bel  ,   ,  ,  •> .,         ^  .  ,  n   , 

|atel        aky  11         gol        esol        adnl 

I.    Akr.  ware  gyere  gliene  lioro  dura  Imuu  afwerew 

Aky.  wa  /oye  )gbeh  bo  du  liuii  afweree 

As.  ware  Igyere  Ighene  durn  liunii  ahwere 

F.  wal  eyel  ehen  bor  dul  liun  aliwel 

W?.  Akv.    liena,  bona  sere  yera  t\vert'\v|  wercwj 

Aky.    nbwae  /seree  hara  \t\vere    \  jwere    f 

As.       bwana  (sere  „  jtwere  (were 

F.        wana  sere  yfiw  kwerew 

n.  Akr.  ^sekyi  patiriw  taforo 

Aky.  Isekyere  patiri  tafere 

As.  wati  tafo,  tafara 

F.  tsiruw  tafer,  tafel 

0.   F.  likes  to  insert  m  in  compound  words  after  nasal   vowels  ;  as, 
Akr.    nifa  ouipa  Onyankopgn 

Ak.         „  „  Onyaukoropgno 

F.         nyimfa      enyimpa      Nyahkompgn 

We  see  that  Akr.  on  the  one  hand  often  has  shorter  forms  than  Ak., 
as  far  as  the  enlargement  (of  var.  1.  5.  into  var.  G.  7.)  is  of  no  value 
for  the  meaning  or  distinction  of  words;  but  it  goes  not  so  far  in 
shortening:  the  Akan  forms  as  F.,  which  reduces  most  forms  of  var.  7 


190  APPENDIX  III.  §  293. 

to  the  vm'.5i  casting  off  oven  tlic  vowel  of  accessory  syllables  beg-in- 
uing  with  r  (which  then  in  some  F.  dialects  changes  into  1).  On  the 
other  hand  Akr.  uses  the  final  w  of  the  F.  (vnr.  2)^  where  Ak.  has 
only  a  simple  vowel  (var.l).  'J'hns  Akr.  sets  the  variations  i.  ^.  5.  7. 
against  1.  7.  in  Ak.  and  1.  2.  5.  in  F.,  and  tliereljy  has  the  advantage 
of  distinguishing  words  of  different  signification,  written  alike  in  Ak. 
or  F.  —  E.  g. 

Akan:  Akropoh  or  the  literary   dialect: 

bo      =  bo,  to  cast  down;  bow,  to  intoxi-ale;  boro,  lo  hc/il,  snrjiuss. 

bobo  =  bobg,  to  strike  (repeatedly):  bobow,  to  roll  up. 

bu      =  bu,  to  hend,  break;   buw,  to  rover,  to  icatrJi.,  lie  in  wait. 

do      =  do,  to  love,    he  deep;   to  imdtiply;  dow,  to  till  tlie  firound. 

dwa  =  dwa,  to  jid  out;  gua,  to  carve;  kyia,  to  salute. 

dwo  =  dwo,  to  cool;  dwow,  to  cut  (to  pieces). 

fe      =  fe,  to  he  smooth;  fe,  to  vom.it;  to  yearn;  '^qw,  to  kisn. 

go(gono)  =  gow,  to  relax,  soften; 

go(gorg)  =  goru,  to  play. 

gy^    =  gy^i')  lo  lead;  to  hrin;}  an  o/f'crinfi;  gyaw,  to  leave. 

hyc    =  hye,  to  spread;  hye,  hycw,  to  hum. 

ka      =  ka,  to  hile;  to  remain;  to  he  common:,  kaw,  to  ferment. 

ku     =  ku,  to  hend  or  he  hent  towards;  kum,  to  kill. 

pa      =  pa,  to  strip,  denude,  renounce  (^'c.  paw,  to  choose. 

po      =  pg,  to  (jrowl;  pow,  to  rah,  polish,  he  proud. 

sa       =  sa,  to  cut,  lance,  geld,  take  out;  saw,  to  draw,  scoop;  to  dance. 

se       =  se,  to  he  alike,  to  fit,  hecome;  to  crack;  sew,  to  spread  out. 

se       :=  se,  to  say;  sew,  to  grind,  sliarpen. 

si       =  si,  to  stand  or  place  upright;  siw,  to  pound;  to  oh.struct. 

so       =  so,  to  drop),  to  kindle,  to  he  tough;  sow,  to  catch,  pick. 

so       =  so,  to  lay  hold  of;  sow,   to  cut,   to  hatch; 

so,   to   carry;  sow,  to  set,  stud,  hear  fruit. 
te       =  tew,  to  transplant;  to  ahide,  waylay;  ta,  to  level. 
te       =  te,  to  hear,  understand,  feel;  to  sit,  live;  tew,  to  tear,  rend. 
to      =  to,  to  lay,  cast;  tow,  to  shoot. 

tvvi  =:  twi,  to  push,  thrust  ahout;  twiw,  to  move;  to  ruh,  clean,  scour. 
wa  =  waw,  to  support,  ward  off;  ware,  to  marry;  ware,  to  he  long. 
wg     =  wg,  to  have;  to  he  (in  a  place);  to  pierce; 

wgw,  to  stamp,  pound,  kick. 
3'e      =  ye,  to  do,  perform  d'c,  to  he;  ye,  to  he  good;  yaw,  to  scold. 
bea    =  hew,  to  cross,  to  impede;  bea,  to  lie  (across). 
bare  =  baw,  to  cover  over,  besmear;  bare, ^o  sli)ig,  umid, twist  round. 
duru  =  du,  to  arrive ;  duru,  to  descend. 
firi     =  fi,   to  proceed  from;  firi,  to  give  or  fake  upon  trust. 
fwane=hiian,  to  snap,    sprain,  ivithdraw; 

huah',  to  peel;  huane,  to  scratch. 
gyene=  gyen,    to  he  clear  (of  water); 

gyene  (neho),  to  surrender  one's  life. 
hini    =  hie,  to  02)en;  hiui,  to  shut  (a  door), 
hunu  =  hu,  to  see,  perceive,  feel;   Imnu,  to  hollow  out. 


§293.  COMPARISON   OF   DIALECTS,  101 

Akan:  Akropon  or  the  literary  dialect: 

sone  ^^  sen,  to  carve]  sen,  to  flow,  to  pass,  si(rj)((s>;; 

sene,  to  cut  in  slices;  to  exchanrje. 
tunc  =  tan,  to  hate;  taue,  to  disturb,  he  disturhed. 
tcne  =  tee,  to  straifflden,  to  he  straiijht,  righteous; 

tene,  to  lie  or  creep  lemjtluvise. 
hara  =  yera  (F.  yew),  to  go  astray,  he  lost;  yeraw,  to  trontilc. 
tvvere=  kyerew,  to  ivrite;  twcrew  (were,  werew)  to  scrape,  (jrate,  scratcJi. 
Of  nouns  also  a  list  of  Akan  words  might  be  got  up,  for  the  differ- 
ent meanings    of   which  Akr.  has  different  forms;    e.  g.  tlie  inliuitivcs 
of  the  preceding  verbs,  and  others  besides,   as  — 
Ak.  Akr. 

kuro  =  kurow,  a  town;  kuru,  ft  sore,  an  ulcer. 
ebo    =  ebo,  a  promise;  ebow,   a  mist,  cloud;  a  Jiaud  (of  lohacro). 

In    Fante    we    likewise   find    verbs    and    nouns    written    alike,     but 
expressing  difi^erent  notions,  for  which  Akr.  has  different  lorms;    e.  g. 
F.  hwau  =--  Akr.  hiiah,  hutln',  liuane    (see  above   under  fwane) 
„   sen      =      „       sen,  sen,  sene  (  »        „  v        sene) 

„    tan       =      „       tan,  tane  (  „        „  ^        tane) 

„   adze    =      „       ade,  ase        I  ^^^  ^^^^^^^  j,^^^^  j  ^ 
„   dadze  =      „      dade,  asase  j 

.3.  Di/fercnt  use  or  form  of  the  prefixes. 

a.  In  i\\Q  prefixes  of  nouns,  the  following  differences  may  be  state!  : 

1.  The  vowel  prefix  o-  is  used  in  nearly  the  same  way  in  Ak.  and 
Akr.  In  the  Fante  dialect  of  Cape  Coast  (if  we  will  judge  from  the 
Mf.  Gr.)  it  is  now  commonly  replaced  by  e-,  whilst  it  was  o-  in  16GS. 
(Milller  has  o-  in  more  than  50  words;  Protten,  1760,  has  o-  in  okra, 
sotd,  but  e-  in  enipa,  ekwang  =:  onipa,  okwan.) 

2.  The  vowel  prefixes  a-  or  e-  and  the  nasal  prefix  m-  are  some- 
times interchanging.  (The  prefix  a-  before  i  and  u  is  usually  written 
e-  by  Midler  and  in  the  3If.  Gr.) 

Akr.  F.  enu,   abieh,  esa,    abiesa,        anah, .  .  .  akron;  |  ^ -y 

Ak.  nnu,  mmiennu,  nsa,  mmieusa,   nnan, .  .  .  hkron.  )  ^ 

Akr.   nhoma     hhwea  nhwi     efwene 

Ak.         „  „  ehwi      eliwen,  hhwen 

F.      I      „  ahwea     i66S        „        nhwen 

|ah(5ma     anhwea  /S40  egwene  pjtjs. 

3.  The  Akr.  prefix  am-  (in  nouns)  is  in  Ak.  and  F.  replaced  by  a-; 
e.  g.   in   Akr.  ampsuV     ansam     antweri  (ladder). 

Ak.     apane       asam       akweri 
-  F.  atweri,  akweri. 

h.  1.    On  the  pronouns  prefixed  to  verbs,  cf.  §  54.  586. 

Akr.   me-,  1     wo-,  thou     o-,  he,  she     e,  it    ye-,  we    mo-,  you  wo-,  theij. 

Ak.        „  wo-  „  e-        ye-  mo-,hom-  ye- 

F.  „  e-  „  Q-         nye-         horn-  wo- 


192  APPENDIX  III.  §  293. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  pronouns  in  the  forms  used  in  Akr.  deserve 
the  preference  before  those  in  Ak.  and  F.  on  account  of  their  liarmony 
with  each  other  and  with  the  independent  and  possessive  forms,  as 
well   as  on  account  of  their  simplicity  and  distinctness. 

2.  In  the  prefixes  of  verbs  in  the  perfect  tense  and  the  consecutive 
form,  the  progressive  form,  the  1st  and  2d  future  tense,  the  2d  im- 
perative and  all  negative  forms,  there  is  scarely  any  diftcrence,  except 
that    F.  in  the  negative  future  forms  uses  the  prefix   ko-  instead  of  be-. 

Concerning  the  chaufjes  of  vo/vcls  of  these  prefixes  by  a  greater 
degree  of  assimilation,  see  hereafter  the  r)th   jtoint. 

4.  Different  form  of  (lie  suffxes. 

a.  In  the  palatal  suffix  (§  3G),  Ak.   has  usually   o  or  e   in  addition 
to,  or  instead  of,   the  e  or  i   of  Akv.   and   F. 
Akr.  fitii       kyinii,       sunn',       soue'       asomdwee 
Ak.     fitie      kyinie,      sumie,     sonee,    asomdwoe 
F.       fitsi  asomgwee. 

h.  I'he  personal  suffix  ni  (Akr.  Ak.)  is  nyi  in  F.  —  'V\w.  jicrsonal 
suffix  fo  (Akr.  F.)  in  Ak.  usually,  though  not  alwajs,  assumes  an 
additional  o;  e.  g. 

Akr.   Ofanteni,        Mfantefo  ;     owudifo  pi.  a  -  Cf.  §  .3S.  42,  3.  4. 

Ak.  n  Mfantefoo     owudil'oo 

F.       Fantsenyi,     Mfantsefo       wudzifo. 

C.  1'he  diminutive  suffx  (§  37)  is,  in  most  cases,  contracted  in  Akr. 
(a  =  aw  a,  and  even  =:  cwa,  ovva,  §  20,  4),  whilst  Ak.  and  F.  usually 
preserve  it  as  a  syllable  by  itself  (\va,  ba,  besides  ma;  ba  in  IGG.s 
was,  and  still  is,  the  prevalent  form  in  F.).  After  a  nasal  consonant  it  is 
ma  in  Akr.  Ak.  F.  (the  31f  Gr.  writing  mba,  but  pronouncing  mm  a). 
Akr.       aniwa      nsatea  afanJl  akura  ahyemma 

Ak.        aniwa      nsateawa      afanawa      akurowa      ahyenma 
F.  jsGS  anyua      nsatseaba     afanaba       akuroba       ehyemba 
i668  aniba       nsateaba  „ 

5.  Differences  in  the  assimilation  of  joining  sounds. 

a.  In  the  assimilation  of  neighbonring  vowels,  F.  goes  farther  than 
Akr.  and  Ak.,  especially  in  the  prefixes  be-  and  ko-  of  the  verb 
(§  91,  G.  9G.).  '^^rhe  vowels  of  these  prefixes  are  made  alike,  ajiproaching 
as  nearly  as  possible  to  the  vowel  of  the  verb.    Cf.  Mf.  Gr.  pag.  58.  59. 

Akr.  (bera    befa,  —  beye,  —  bemene,  —  bepan,  —  bepnn,  —  bebu, 

Ak.    [kg       kofa,  —  koye,  —  komene,  —  kgpah,  —  kopun,  — kobu; 

-pi  ^bra  bafa,  —  beye,  —  bemen,  • — bapan,  ■ — ■  l)opun,  — ])obu, 
\ko       kafii,  —  keye,  —  kemen,    —  ka])an,  —  kopun,  —  kobu. 

The  prefixes  me  (or  mi)  of  the  present,  and  me  (or  me)  of  the 
future  tense  (§91,G)  are  likewise  represented  in  more  than  two  forms 
in  the  Mf  Gr.  p)ag.  .^8. 


§  293.  COMPARISON    OF    DIALECTS.  193 

Akr.  \Vres.  moba  moye  memcne  mcko  mepah  mibu, 

Ak.     \FiiL     iiicba  incye  memcne  meko  mcpan  mebu ; 

.,       yVrca.   in'ba  ineyc  uuanen  muko  m'pan  mubn, 

\bnl.     maba  mcye  mcmen  mokg  mapaii  mobu. 

h.  In  the  assimilation  of  joining  cotlfiOnanls,  Akr.  is  more  consistent 
and  decided,  whilst  Ak.  and  F.  frcf|nently  preserve  the  original  sounds. 
'J'lie  JMf.Gi'.  writes  mb,  nd,  ng,  though  the  pronunciation  be  mm,  nn,  I'ln.) 

Akr.  ahycmma     adomma,    nnonnomma     dennen,        dcnnennen 

Ak.     ahyenma      adoiima  dendcn         dendcndcndeu 

F.       ehyemba       adonba,      adoi'idgnba       dzendzen 

6.  Transformation  and  loss  of  oriijitial  sounds  in  composition  and 
rcdnplicalion. 

Original  sounds,  especially  in  compounds,  are  more  or  less  fully 
preserved.  The  decay  of  original  sounds,  by  the  processes  of  shor- 
tening, assimilation,  elision  and  contraction,  in  compound  and  redupli- 
cated words,  seems  to  be  least  in  Ak.  and  perhaps  most  in  Akr.;  in 
some  cases  F.  has  the  shortest  forms  (cf.  2.  var.  7). 
Akr.     aduaii        anuouyam      onya         osrfini  harehare      duruduru 

Aky.  /adibane    animcnyam    onyina  „  dudu 

As.      laduane     animonyam    (onyira)   osorani  „  „ 

1*\         adziban    animnyam  sorodanyi    hahare  dudurn 

Akr.  Akosua  Abcna       Kwabena  Yaw         Ya  Kwanie      Amma 

Aky.  Akwasiwa    Abeiiawa  „  „  Yawa  „  „ 

As.      (Akwasiba)/Abena])a  „  „  (Yaba)  „  „ 

F.       Akosua        lAbraba     Kobena     Kwaw     Aaba     Kwamena  Amba 

(of  Kwayaw,  Ayaba) 
Akr.  komd,    Aky.  konona,    As.  korond,    F.  akuma,  heart. 

7.  Differences  of  the  tone  of  words  and  inflexial  forms. 

In  the  tone  there  are  differences  between  Akr.  and  Ak.  alluded  to 
in  §  2.5  Be7n.  49,  3.  d.  e.  166,  5  Hem. 

Of  F.  we  know  too  little  in  this  respect. 

8.  Differences  in  the  conslruciion  of  ivords  and  sentences. 

a.  After  the  verb  niTi,  to  (jive,  in  the  meaning  to  cause,  to  let,  the 
pronoun  follows  it  in  the  objective  form  in  Ak.,  whilst  it  is  prefixed 
to  the  succeeding  verb  (as  its  subject)  in  Akr.  and  F.  Cf.  §  106,  25 
Jlejn.  and  §  181. —  'J'he  same  verb  raTi  is  used  in  F.  as  an  auxiliary 
(o   the  negative  imperative,  where  Akr.  and  Ak.   do  not  want  it.   K.  g. 

Akr.  Wnnyi  me  aye  a,   nsce  me  din.    Frov. 

F.       Enyi  m'  aye  a,  mma  nsee  me  dzin. 

h.  After  nouns  in  the  nominative  and  possessive  cases,  the  corre- 
sjjonding  pronouns  are  added  in   F.,   but  not  in  Akr.  and  Ak.     F.  g. 

Akr.  m'agya  odau  Kwadvvo  koe  Yaw   no  Yii  bae 

Ak.     agya  odane  Kwadwo  korec      Yaw  no  Yawa  baee 

F.        m'agya  ne  dan.      Kogwo  okoe.  Kwaw  onye  Aaba    wobae. 

13 


194  i^PPENDlX  III.  §  293- 

C.  F.  iinpaivs  the  distinctness  of  pronunciation  by  frequently  siipjircss- 
tHfl  llie,  vowels  of  the  pronouns  me  and  no,  or  other  vowels,  more 
than  Akr.  and  Ak.  do.    Examples  from  the  Mf.  Gr.pag.  lOG.  172.  17(k 

Akr.  Mekyen  no  nantew  ;    Ade  benara  a  wode  bekg  no,  orcnnye; 
Ak.     JNIekyenc  no  nante;      Adee  ben'ara  a  wode  bekoro,  orcnnye; 
F.       Mekycnc  n'  nants'w.    Eben'   adz'ara  na  odz'  bokor  a,  onkegye. 
Akr.  Mete  wo  yaw  memawo;     wote  me  yaw  mii  me 
Ak.         „        „   ya  „        „  ;       ,,         „  ya        „      „ 

F.       M'tse  wo  yew  m'ma  wo ;     etse     m'  yew    ma  m'. 

9.  Different  signification  of  the  same  ivord  in  different  dialects. 
The  same   word  may  be  ixsed  in  a  narrower  sense  in  one  dialect  and 

in  a  wider  sense  in  another  aj,  or  in  a  sense  altogether  different  &j.  E.  g. 

a.  Akr.  enan,  the  foot,  is  also  used  in  a  wider  sense,  including 
gyaw,  gya,  Ak.  gyawa,  tlie  leg,  and  sere,  Ak.  seree,  tlie  thigh. 

Akr.  otam,  the  cloth  round  the  loins,  tvaistcloth,  =  amoase,  danta, 
is  also  iised  =  ntama,  Ak.  ntoma,  cloth  (in  general). 

h.  Akr.  afuw,    Ak.  afuo,    a  plantation  =  F.  ekwa,  ham; 
F.       afuw,  iveeds,  =^  A]sA\  wura,  riwura,  Ak.  wira,  hwira. 

10.  Different  ivords  or  phrases  for  the  same  things  or  thoughts. 
The  same  thing  has  often  several  names,  of  which  one  is  used  more 

in  this,  another  more  in  that  dialect.  E.  g. 

Akr.  F.  agya,  father,  ena,  mother.  In  Ak.  the  speaker  uses  both 
words  only  of  his  own  parents  (omitting  the  pronoun  me  before  them); 
for  the  parents  of  others,  the  words  ose,  father,  oni,  motJier,  are  used. 

Akr.   onuabea,  Ak.  onuaba.  As.  onuawa,  F.  akyerewa,  akyiriba,  sister. 

Akr.  akyi  ba,  Ak.  ama  ril,  F.  amona,  next  younger  hrother  or  sister. 

Akr.  aberekyi,  Ak.  F.  amporikye,  goat. 

Akr.  opapo,  Aky.  aberekyinini,  he-goat. 

Words  peculiar  to  Ak.  will,  in  general,  be  readily  admitted  in  Akr. 
Words  peculiar  to  F.  will  less  readily  be  admitted,  if  there  are  words 
in   Ak.  or  Akr.  expressing  the  same  thing  or  notion. 

Akr.  hintiw,  Aky.  sunti,  F.  purow,  to  stumble; 

Akr.  purow,  to  challenge;  to  loathe. 

Akr.  ode,  Ak.  odce,  F.  ed\vo,  yam.  (Akr.  dwokorow,  the  core  of  a  yum.). 

Akr.  Ak.  kokoam,  F.  dodom,  in  the  corner,  secretly. 

Akr.  hunu,  Ak.  hun,  F.  gyan,  gyennyah,  in  vain. 

Akr.  Ak.  trii  ase,  tena  ase,  F.  tena  ase,    ky  fam,  sit  down. 

Akr.  ^hee,  F.  ohoo,  no;  Akr.  wom'moa,  F.wiin  tvva  apdw,  you  are  right. 

Akr.  nc  yam  ye  nwene,  oye  ayamonwene,  F.  oye  kane,  he  is  stingy. 

Akr.  atu  me  abasam,    ama  mapa  abaw,    F.  eye  me  abagow,   it  has 

discouraged  me. 
Akr.  wahye  me  bo,   wahye  mo  ase,  wasi  me  anowowa, 
F.       wahye  m'ase,  wabo  me  anohoba,  he  has  given  me  a  promise. 
Akr.  ode  ne  ho  ato  wo  so,  he  trusts  in  thee; 
F.       ode  no  were  ahye  wo  mu,  lie  has  put  his  confidence  in  thee. 


§  293.  COMPARISON    OV   DIALPICTS.  195 

11.  Foraign  tvords  in  the  Akropong  and  other  Tshi  dialects. 

The  Tshi  language  influences  (and  lends  to)  neighbouring  languages 
much  more  than  it  is  influenced  by  (and  borrows  from)  them,  and 
shows  no  tendency  to  grasp  foreign  words  for  its  own  enrichment. 
Yet  there  is  a  number  of  words  borrowed  from  neighbouring  and 
European  languages,  viz.  a.  Guaii,  l>.  Akra  or  Ga;  c.  Portuguese., 
d.  English,  e.  Dutch,  f.  Danish,  g.  German.  The  words  of  a.  h.  f.  g. 
may  be  said  to  be  peculiar  to  the  Akropong  or  Akuapem  dialect,  but 
are  few  in  number;  the  words  of  e.  d.  e.  are  common  to  the  Tshi 
dialects  in  general.  ("Words  from  European  languages  frequently  have 
double  tones  in  single  syllables;  cf.  §  22,  3). 

a.  Of  the  Guan  language  we  find  less  words  in  the  Akuapem 
dialect,  peculiar  to  it,  than  might  have  been  expected  from  the  facts 
mentioned  in  the  Introduction  §  1  C  4c.  They  are  chiefly  proper  names, 
and  names  of  less  known  plants  and  animals.  E.  g.  Tete  and  Tete' 
(Tete  and  Tete  are  Akra  names  for  tlie  first  and  second  son ;  Tete  is 
the  Tshi  name  of  an  Akem  town;  tete  is  a  Tshi  word  =  ancient  time); 
pjidede  =  siwabiri,  a  certain  plant. 

h.  Of  the  Alcra  (Ga)  language  may  have  been  taken:  frofrow,  native 
fricassee,  G.  flou,  flouflou,  from  fo,  fro,  flo,  flou,  to  cut. 

The  phrase  'odi  ne  ho  few'  is  suspected  to  be  taken  from  Ga  (eye 
ehe  feo)  =  ogoru  ne  ho,  he  mocks  at  (or  plays  ahout)  him,  though  few- 
is  a  Tshi  word  received  in  Ga. 

C.  Of  the  Forttiguese  language,  though  it  was  used  as  the  medium 
of  conversation  in  the  trade  on  the  Gold-Coast  by  Negroes  and  Euro- 
peans, at  least  the  Dutchmen  and  Danes,  for  more  than  hundred  years 
after  the  expulsion  of  the  Portuguese,  not  many  words  have  been  re- 
ceived in  the  language  of  the  natives;  e.  g,  prako  (G.  kploto'),  P.  porco, 
a  png;  kiimisa,  P.  camisa,  camisao,  a  shirt;  asepatere,  F.  asupatsel, 
P.  gapato,  shoe;  krata,  P.  carta,  a  sheet  of  paper ;  pano',  P.p)ao,  bread; 
tabow,  P.  tahoa,  a  hoard;  kobere,  P.  cohre,  copper;  seda,  P.  seda,  silk. 

d.  English  words  are  more  frequent;  e.  g.  briiku',  a  hook;  topo', 
a  tid);  ben'sere,  a  hason ;  pensere,  a  pencil;  girase,  a  glass;  prase, 
plaster;  prete  (=  taforoboto),  a  plate;  srete,  a  slate;  pen,  a  pen;  siri- 
kyi,  silk;  samana,  to  summon  ;  konsebre  Akr.,  konsomiri  Aky.,  a  con- 
stable; sise  (=  akwahhyede),  subsistence:,  sirin,  F.  sideri,   a  shilling. 

e.  To  the  Dutcll  lang.  we  may  ascribe  :  mfeusere,  D.  venster,  a  ivindow. 

f.  To  the  Danish  language:  dagire,  Dan.  lak,  sealing-wax;  hagire, 
Dan.  hagel,  hail-shot;  dare,  F.  dadare,  Dan.  daler,  a  dollar. 

(To  e.  or  f.  krakum,  Dutch:  kalkoen,  Dan.  kalkiin,  a  turkeg.) 

g.  Of  the  German  language  are  taken  :  brete,  pi.  mmerete,  F.  tabow, 
G.  brett,  a  board;  hanspa,  G.  handspaten,  a  spade. 

12.  New  ivords  in  the  literary  dialect. 

A  good  number  of  words  have  been  formed  and  introduced  into  the 
literary  dialect  by  the  translation  of  the  Bible  and  various  other  books. 


196  APPENDIX  m.  §293 

New  words  of  this  kind  are  eillicr  derived  from,  or  conijiounded  of 
words  already  existing  in  the  language"),  or  taktjn  from  oilier  lan- 
guages/'j.  (This  borrowing  from  other  languages  has  been  limited  to 
names  of  foreign  things,  as  persons,  animals,  plants,  eoramercial  ob- 
jects, coins,  weights  and  measures,  instruments,  a.  s.  f.)   E,  g. 

a.  adubiri,  inh  (fr.  aduru,  any  medkine,  drug  or  cliemi'ud  prepara- 
tion, biri,  to  he  hlack  or  of  any  dark  colour). 

odufrafo,  a  chemist^  apotliccanj^  fr.  aduru,  medicine,  fra,  to  mix. 

adufrascm,  pliarmary ;  kafranyansil,   vhennstry. 

botoludiuw-atiri,  stcam-en(jinc\  adabankwan,  railroad; 

mframatoa,  ahuinnuhyen,  an  air-halloon;  akyirikyerewib,  a  tclefirajiJi; 

okanea-niframa,  illmninaliny-iias;  fa-nno,  asasc-mu-i"ii'io,  pclrolenm; 

haiin-mfonini,   ft  jdioloyraph;  okyin-nsoroma,   a  planet. 

amTuiae,  post-office;  amanadc,  thinys  sent  hy  the  ])0st\  amjiuctde-fwefo, 
post-master,  fr.  niclna,  to  send  (by  opportunity),  to  forward  to. 

adonnyclde,  means  of  (jracc,  fr.  dom,  yrace,  nya,  to  (jet,  ade,  l/ti)i() 
(something  by  which  grace  is  obtained). 

adommanride,    sacrament    (something  by  which   grace  is  conveyed). 

odiyifo,  a  pro})1iet,  fr,  yi  adi,  reveal,  disclose,  hrin()  forth,  manifest. 

abotanforofo  (lit.  rocJc-climber),  the  ivild  goals  of  the  ro:k.    Juh.'JO,!. 

akutugua,  an  apple  (tree),  fr.  akutu,  an  orange  and  oguawa,  a  gaava. 

/>.  Kaesare  (or  hempon),  Ccesar,  emperor ;  tsar,  sfir,  czar;  sultan,  kalife, 

sail,  kan,  pasa,  hospodar ;  kurfiirst,  or  pawhene,  elector;  her-zog,  or 

sahene,  r/u/je.    Papa,  ^;oy>c;  cpiskopo,  or  asafo-so-fwefo,  hishoj);  &c. 

Aristokratefo  (omananiwafo),  liberalefo  (ahofadipcfo),  demokratefo  &c. 

b(diemot  [susonoj;  lewiatan  [odenkyem];  Job  40,  15.  41,  1. 

anoma-kasida  (hasida),   a  stork,  Lev.  11, 19.  Job  39, 13.  rs.l(M,17. 

allon-dua,  ela-dua  or  terebinte-dua,  elon-dua,  (or  odum,  okum,  dupon), 
oak,  terehinih,  teil  tree,  cite.  Gen.  1:3,6.  35,4.8.  Ju(l<j.9,6.37.  Is. 6, 13.  44,14. 

gofer-dua,  dibo-dua  (fr.  deal-hoard),  kuin-C-.sl,  firlree,  cypress  d^c.  sitim- 

dua,  Ex.  25,10;  sikomore-dua  ;  granate  (-akutu,  a,iovoi)o), pomegranate. 

kofcr,  narde,   karkom,   kane,  kinamon,  mire,  aloe;    Sol.  Song  6,7. 

soham-bo,  onyx  stone;  sardio,  topasio,  yaspi-bo  &c.  (or  bogyanam-bo, 
akrate-bo,  afwcfwcbo  &c.  Ex. -28, 17-20);  margarite  [alienepfi],  apiearl; 

den  are,  Lat.  denarius,  dipaQioi';  talente,  Mat.  17,24.27;  18,24.;  sekel; 
gera;  homer,  kor  (korokese.  opodo,  1  Ki.  5,11),  bat,  efa,  liin,  gomer,  &c. 

sambuka-sanku,  (^acJchid?)  Ban. 3,  5.  fi'-  (xutijv/.il  and  osanku,  a  kind 
of  string-instrument;  kompase,  a  compas;  a  p)air  of  compasses. 

Rem.  Expressions  of  mathematics  and  natural  or  other  sciences  arc 
translated  into  Tshi  as  far  as  possible.  Some  such  translated  expressions 
arc  found  in  Ch.  Bellons  ^'Inslriiclion  in  Arilhmetic",  pag.  174.  175. 
Other  ncAV  or  foreign  words,  besides  those  in  the  Bible,  are  found  in 
the  Stories  from  General  History  translated  by  1).  Asante. 

(M'.   the   list   C.  No.  02.  .'57.  on  jtagc;  XI.   of  this  Grammar. 


T  A  B  L  E    O  F    n  O  N  T  P:  N  T  S . 


Preface .... 

Lists  of  Books  for  Lilcnirji  Ucfcrotrcs. 

A.  Aiitliors  on  Geoj^iapliical  and  llisloiical  Matters  of  tlic,  (i.  (J 

B.  Authors  furnishing  inl'ornuition    on  the  'J'shi   Language 

C.  Puhlications  of  the  Basel  Missionaries  in  Tshi     .     .     . 

lNTR01>rCT0KY    NoTES 

on  the  Languages  and  Dialects  of  the  Gold  Coast    . 
§  1.  The  Dialects  of  Tshi.     P^nuiiieratiou   of  Countries 
§  2.   Countries  and  Languages  to  the  North   (jf  Asante 
§  :;.    Names    of  the  Language:    Tshi,  Aniina,  Akan 
§  4.  The  Literary  resp.  Akuapem  Dialect,  and  the  Akan  and 

Faute  Dialects 

§  5.  Other  Languages  spoken  in  tlii'  Gold  Coast  Countries 

§  6.   NeighI)ouring  Languages 

§  7.   Tlie  Position  of  Tshi  among  the  African   Languages 


I-V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

X-XIV 

X 

XIV 

XV 

XVII 

XX 

XXI 

XXII 


A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  ASANTE  AND  FANTE  OR  TSHI  LANGUAGE. 
Part  I.  —  Of  Sounds  and  Letters  (PHONOLOGY). 
CiiAr,  I.  —  Pronuncialtoii  and  Division  of  Sounds  §1-15     .     1-8 

Alphabet,    §  1 1 

Vowels,  §  2-7 1 

Simple  vowels:   division  and  pronunciation,   §2 1 

nasal  vowels,  3;  fjuantity,  4 2 

Compound  Vowels:  diphthongs,  §  5;  disyllabic  combinations,  f j ;  3 

diphthongs  with  a  very  short  vowel,  7 4 

Consonants,  §  8— 13 4-7 

Simple  consonants:   division  and  jtrouunciatioii,  §  ^i     . 

lengthened  semi-vowels,  9 

Compound   Consonants:  palatalized,  §10;  labialized,   11;  . 

palato-labials,   12 

System  of  consonants,  §  1 3 

Fante  and  foreign  letters,  §  14 

Names  of  letters,  §  15 


4 

4 

5, .; 

7 
7 


8-13 


Chap.  u.  —  Eupliony.  §16-22 

Changes  of  letters  in  general,   §16 8 

Assimilation,  §17,  18;  permutation,  10;  elision  and  contraction, 
20;  apocope,  21;  insertion  and  addition,  22 


8-13 


198  CONTENTS. 


CiiAiMii.  —  *S?///«7>^c.s.  §  23-26 13-16 

Structuro,  of  Syllables,  §  23 13 

Division   of  syllables,  §  24 14 

Tone  and  Accent,  §  25,  26 15,  16 

Tone  of  vowels  and  semi-vowels,  §  25 15 

Accent  of  words,  or  stress  on  syllables,  §26 16 

Part  II.  —  Of  Words  (ETYMOLOGY). 

Chap.  I.  —  Forvncdion  of  Words  in  tjeiicraL  §27-30.    ,     .      17-lt) 

Distinction  f)f  words  concerning  their  form  and  origin,    §27      .  17 

Primitives.    Primary  and   secondary  stem.    §28 17 

Derivatives.    Prefixes,  suffixes,   reduplication.   §  29 17 

Compounds,  perfect,    imperfect,  obscure.    §30 19 

CiiAP.  II.  -  The  Fads  of  Speech.  §  31-147 19-95 

Eight  classes   of  single  words,  §31 19 

1 .  Noun  s. 

Definition  and  division,   §32.33 20 

Structure   of   nouns,    §  34 21 

Formation  by  prefixes,  §35 21 

by  suffixes  (palatal,  diminutive,  perscmal),  §  36-38.    ...  23 

Compound  nouns,  §  39 25 

Tone  and  accent  of  nouns,  §  40 30 

Gender,    §  41 32 

Number,  §42-44 33 

Case,  or  different  position  in  the  sentence,  §  45.  46 36 

Independent    and   connected  form,    §  47-50 37 

Other  changes  of  the  original  tone,  §  51 39 

2.  Pronouns. 

Definition  and  division,  §  52 39 

I.  Personal  pronouns: 39-41 

independent,  §  53;  prefixed,  54;  possessive,  55;   objective,  56;  39,40 

reflexive,   57;    comparative  view    and    dialects,  58;    emphatic  41 

compound  forms,  .^9 41 

II.  Interrogative,  demonstrative,  indefinite;  pronouns:  ....  42 
for  persons,  things,  places,  times,  manner,  quantity,  §  60.  .  .  42 
cases,  61:  the  indefinite  pronoun  dc,   62,  and  nom,   63.     .     .  43 

III.  Relative  pronouns: 14 

Pron.  in  connection   with  the  relative  particle    'a',    §64.    .      .  44 

demonstrative  pron.  compounded  with  the  relat.  particle,  65.     .  45 

3.  Adjectives. 

Definition  and  division,  §  66 45 


CONTENTS.  199 


I.  Adjective  nonns,  denoting  quality  or  quantity  and  nninlicr,  §  67.  46 
different  uses,   68;   primitives,   derivatives,    compounds,   69.     .  46 

different  forms  connected  with   different  uses,   70 47 

personal  nouns  derived  from  adj(>ctives,  71 47 

Plural  form,  §  72.    Gradation,  §  73 47,  48 

II.  Adjective  pronouns,  or   distinguishing  adjectives,  §  74.     .      48,  49 

III.  Distinguishing  particles,  relative  and  emphatic,  §  75.     .     .  49 

4.  Numerals. 

Definition  and  division,  §  76 50 

Cardinal  numerals,  primary  and  compound,  §  77-79     ...  50 

Nouns  compounded  with  numerals,  §  80 52 

Iterative  and  multiplicative  numerals,  §  81 53 

Distributive  numerals,   §  82.    Ordinal  numerals,  §  83.  .     .     .      53,  54 

Fractional  numbers,  §  84 55 

5.  Verbs. 

Definition;  notions  expressed  by  them,  §85 55 

Division;  transitive,  intransitive,  locative,  86 ;  other  kinds,  87.      55,56 

General  structure    of   the  verb,    §  88 56 

Inflexion  of  the  verb.   §89-103  or  112 56 

Person  and  number;  pronominal  prefixes,  §89 56 

Moods  and  tenses,  §  90 57 

Ten  principal  forms  of  the  finite  verb,  §91 58 

Affirmative   and    negative    form,    §  92 60 

Ingressive  form,    §  93 60 

Independent  and  connected  form,  §  94 60 

Examples  to  §  91-94  (monosyllabic  and  disyllabic),  §  95-98.       60-64 

Reduplication  of  verbs,   §  99 64 

Tone  of  trisyllabic  and  polysyllabic  verbs,  §  100 65 

Tones  of  certain  monosyllabic  and   disyllabic  verbs,   §  101     .  65 

Verbs  used  in  the  continuative  form,  §  102 66 

The  palatal  suffix    in    the    continuative  form,  §  103.     ...  67 

Infinitive  mood  (verbal  nouns),  §  104 67 

Compound  infinitives,  §  105 68 

Combinations  of  verbs,  §106 69 

((.  with    auxiliaries    (15    kinds)    referring    to    preparation,    time, 

completion,  repetition  and  other  modalities  of  action,    §  107.  69 

h.  with  auxiliaries  (de&c.)  introducing  a  passive  object,   108.    .  70 
c.  with    auxiliaries    (directive  verbs)    introducing    a    locative    or 

terminative  complement,   109 71 

(/.with  supplemental  verbs,   110 72 

e.  with  auxiliaries  denoting  quality  of  action.   111 73 

Varieties  of  the  forms  and  tones  of  such  combinations,  §112.  73 

Conihinations  of  verbs  with  specific  subjects  or  complements,  §  1 13.  73 


200  CONTENTS. 


6.  Adverbs  including  Postpositions. 

Definition  of  radverb,  §  114;  of  jjostposition,  115;  division,  IK).       7,'j,  74 

I.  Prepositions  and  postpositions    in    general,  §  117 74 

II.  Nonns  oi'  place  and   relalion,    ser\ing    as    adverbs  and   ])ost- 

])()sitions,  §  118-122 77-SO 

III.  Otber  nouns  and  pronouns  of  ])lace,  §  123-127.    .     .     .       81-83 
an  adverb  of  place,  128 " 83 

IV.  Nouns  and  adverbs  of  time,  §120.130 83-85 

V.  Nouns  and  adverbs  of  manner  and  degree,  §131-13.5.    .      85-89 

1.  Nouns,    singly    or    with  postpositions,    §131 85 

2.  Proper  adverbs,    derived  from  pronouns,   adjectives,    verbs, 

or  primitive,   or  compound:  division,  132 80 

demonstrative  adverbs  and  adjectives  used  as  adverbs,  13/^.  8(5 
descriptive,    imitative,    distinguishing    adverbs,    and   other 

adverbs  of  extent,  134 87 

adverbs  of  certainty,    contingency,   negation,    135.      ...  8S) 

VI.  Nouns  and  adverbs  of  cause,  §  13G 89 

Vir,   English  adverbs  expressed  by  verbs  and  otherwise,  §  137.  89 

7.  Conjunctions. 

Definition    and    division,   §  138 89 

Conjunctions  that  connect  a.  co-ordinate  j)arts  of  sentences,  §  l.'>9.  90 

h.  co-ordinate   sentences,    §  140 90 

C.  snbonlinate    sentences    with    principal  uncs,   §111.     .     .      .  90 

Interrogative  particles,  §  142 94 

8.  Interjections  &c. 

Definition,  §  143 94 

Enclitic  sounds  giving  emphasis,    §  1 44 94 

Exclamations    and    acclamations,    §  145 94 

Colloquial    interjc^ctions,    §  14G 95 

Salutations  and  their  replies,  §  147 95 

Part  III.  —  Of  Sentences  (SYNTAX). 

D(^finition  of  sentence;    principal   pai'ts  of  it.    §148 90 

Different  kinds  of  sentences,  §  149;  indicative,  150;  optative,  151  ;  90 

imj)erative,   152;  interrogative,    153;  exclamatory,  154.   .     .     .  90 

Structure  of  sentences:    simple    and    com])ound   sentence,  §155.  97 

►Section  i.  —  simple  sentences. 

CiiAv.i.  — The  Subject.  %lbG-16\ 98,99 

The  simple  suliject  a  noun  or  pronoun,  §  1 50,  an  impers.  pron.,  1  57;  9(S 
its  ])Osition   before  or  after  the  v.  n  e,    158;    double  expression 

of  the  subjf'ct,    159;  omission   of  the,  subject,    1 OO 99 

Coni]K)und    subjects,   §  101 99 


CONTENTS.  201 


CiiAP.  n.  —  The  Predicate.  §  16'2-1H2 1( »()-!( »6 

Definition    and    constituent  parts,  §  162 100 

Tlie  simple  predicate  a  single  verb,    §163 100 

Compound  predicates,  §  164 100 

Uses  of  the  inflected  forms  of  the  verb,  §165-182.  .  .  .  101-106 
In  what  ways  the  passive  voice  is  supplied,  §  165  Jic'Wi.  .  .  101 
Present  tense,  §166;  continuative  form,  167;  negative,  16H.  101 
Preterit  tense,  169;  negative,  170;  Perfect  tense,  171 ;  ncg.,  172.      102 

Progressive  form,  173;    negative,  174 103 

Future  I.  175;  future  II.  176;  negative,  177 104 

Consecutive  form,   178;  negative,  179 104,  105 

Imperative  I.  &  II.  180;    compound,  181 ;   negative,  182.      .  105, 106 

Chap.  III. —  ^f^r/fiitfes.  §  183-197 106-110 

Members  of  sentences  enlarged  by  attributes,  §  183 106 

Three  kinds  of  attributes,  §  184 • 106 

1.  The  attributive  adjective  and  numeral,    §  185 106 

successive  order,   186;  composition  with  the  noun,  187.     .     .  106 

co-ordinate  adjectives,  188;   adjective  sentence,    189.     .     .     .  107 

2.  The  appositive  noun,  §  190; 107 

apposition  and  composition    of  personal  nouns,  191.      .     .     .  108 

3.  The  attributive    noun    and  pronoun,  §192; 108 

relations  expressed  by  the  attribute,  193;  composition  with  the  108 
noun  qualified  by  it,  194;  double  expression  of  the  attribute,  195; 
compensation   for,    or   omission  of,    the    noun  qualified  by  the 

attribute;    a  sentence  instead  of  an  attributive  noun;    196.     .  109 

Different  attributes  added  to  one  noun,  §  197 110 

Chap.  iv.  —  Completion  of  tJie  Fredkate.  §  198-220.     .     .  110-130 
Different  kinds  of  complement,  §198 110 

1.  The  nominative  complement  (expressing  identity,  distinct  in- 
dividuality, class,  quality,  state  or  condition,  number,  difference 

and  change  of  existence),  §199 110-112 

2.  The  objective  complement  (object),  §  200-206 112-118 

Various   kinds,  §  200;    simple  or   compound   object,    position, 
connected  form,    the  object  made  emphatic,  201 ;   omission  of 

the  object,   202;    the  object  an  infinitive,   203 112-115 

Passive  and  resultive  objects,  §  204.  Direct  and  indirect  objects: 
passive  and  resultive,  205;   dative  and  passive,   206.     .     .115-118 

3.  The  locative  complement,  complement  of  place,  §207-208.118-120 
the  place  mentioned  by  itself  or  with  reference  to  a  thing,  207.  118 
a  list  of  locative  verbs,  and  examples,   208 119 

4.  The  (adverbial)  complement  of  manner,  §209 120 

5.  Specific    complements   of  verbal    phrases,  §210-220.     .      .121-130 
Definition    of  verbal    phrase,    210 121 

1)  The  specific  complement   like   an  object,  211.212 121 

2)  The  spec,  compl.  like  a  locative  compl.,   213.214.   .     .     .122,123 

3)  The  spec,  subject  a  noun  of  place  with  its  attribute,  215.     .     124 


202  CONTENTS. 


4-0)  J^lirascs  cxprcssiug  bodily  or  uu'utal  actions  or  aftVctious,  21G.  125 

4)  tlio  .s])('c.  subjccl,  a  [lart  of  a  persons  body  witb  its  attrib.,  217.  125 

5)  tbo  s[)('c.  object  ditto,  including  reflexive  verbs,   218.      .      .      .  127 

6)  mixed  and  complex  verbal  phrases,   219 128 

7)  V'erbal  phrases,  a  principal  and  a  supplemental  verb,  220.     .  129 

CiiAi\  V.  —  Extension   of  tJie  Predicate.   §221-243.     .     .130-142 

DiiTerent    kinds    of*    adjunct,   §221 130 

l.Tlie  adjunct  of  ])lace,  §  222;   introduced  by  auxiliaries,  223;  131 

two  or  more  adjuncts  combined,  224;  omission  of  the  aux.  v.,225.  132 

2. 'Jhe  adjunct  of  time,  §226;    ways  of  expressing  it,  227;     .  133 

merely  adverbial,  228;  with  auxiliaries,  229;  merely  verbal,  230;  133 

uses  of  the  verb  kye  as   a    principal  or  auxiliary  verb,  231.  135 

3.  The  adjunct  of  manner,  §232;   ways  of  expressing  it,  233;  136 
adjuncts  of  quality  or  mode,  234;  of  degree  and  extent,  235;   136,137 
of  certainty  or  contingency,   236;    of  manner  =  instrument  of 
action,  price  or  exchange,    accompaniment  or  exclusion,    237.  138 

4.  The  adjunct  of  cause,  §238;  ways  of  expressing  it,  239.  .  140 
a  real  cause,  240;  a  material,  241 ;  a  condition,  a  concession,  242.  140 
a  purpose  or  intention,  243 141 

Chap.  vi.  —  Subordinate  and  co-ordinate  Farts  of  Sentences. 
Order  of  Words.    Emphasis.    Ellipsis. 

1.  Subordinate  parts    of  simple   sentences,  §244 143 

2.  Co-ordinate  parts  of  simple  sentences,  §  245 143 

3.  Order  of  words.  Combinations  of  collateral  parts  of  a  sent.,  246.  145 

4.  Emphasis,   §247 146 

5.  Ellipsis,  §  248 148 

Section  ii.  —  compound  sentences. 

Chap.  i.  —  Co-ordinate  Sentences.    §  249-253 149 

1.  Copulative    co-ordination,    §250 149 

2.  Adversative  co-ordination,  §251 151 

3.  Causative  (illative)  co-ordination,  §252 152 

4.  Contraction  and  abbreviation  of  co-ordinate  sentences,    §253.  152 
Subordinate   thoughts   expressed    by  co-ordination,   §  253"'"     .     .  153 

Chap.  II.  —  Subordinate  Sentences.  §  254,-2^0 155 

1.  Noun-sentences,  §255;  abbreviation  and  contraction,  256.    156-158 

2.  Adjective  sentences,  §257;    abbreviation    of   such,   258.     .      .      159 

3.  Adverbial  sent.,  259;  a.  of  place,  260;   b.  of  time,  261-266;   160-165 

c.  of  manner,  267;  of  comparison,  268;  abbrev.  of  such,  269;  165,  166 
of  degree,  270;  abbreviated,  271  ;  of  proportion,  272;  .  .  166,  167 
of  extent,   by  effect  or  consequence,   273; 168 

d.  of  cause,  274  ;  of  a  real  cause,  motive  or  reason,  275 ;  of 
condition,  276;  of  (time  or)  condition  expressed  by  co-ordination, 
276**;  of  exception,  277;  of  concession,  278;  of  purpose  or  in- 
tention, 279;  abbreviated  sentences  of  intention,  280.     .      169-175 


CONTENTS.  203 


CiiAi'.  111.  Miuiifold  Cow puHiid  Sentences.  §281-2S4.  175-17S 
More,  than  two  co-ordinate  principal  sentciiocs,  §2H1.  .  .  .  175 
Two  or  more  siibortlinale  aentences,  §282.  Periods,  §  2H.'3.  .  17(i,  177 
Sentences  in   pareiitliesis,   §  28-4 178 

Appendix  i, —  On  Subjects  connected  with  OrlJiOijraphy.  .178-182 

A.  Punctuation,   §285 178 

B.  Capital  Letters,  §  286 181 

C.  Abbreviations,  §287 182 

Appendix  ii.  —  On  Frosody  and  Kindred  SuhjecLa.  .  .  183-185 
l.C)rtlio('py,   Emphasis,  Pauses,   Intonation,  §288 183 

2.  Native  Poetry,  §289 183 

3.  Versification,  §  290 184 

4.  Rhetoric,  §  291 184 

Appendix  hi.  —  A  Comparison  of  the  Leading  Dialects.  .  185-196 
'I'he  literary  dialect,  uniting;  the  Akan  and  Pante  dialects,  §  292.  185 
(Grammatical  and  lexicographic  points  of  difference,  §293.    .  185-19(5 

1 .  Transformation  of  commencing  consonants  of  stems.    .     .     .     186 

2.  Variation  of  the  vowels  and  the  final  sounds  of  stems     .     .     187 

3.  Different  use  or  form  of  the  prefixes 191 

4.  Different  form   of  the  suffixes 192 

5.  Differences  in  the  assimilation  of  joining  sounds 193 

6.  'I'ransformafion  and    loss   of  sounds  in  composition.     .     .     .      193 

7.  Differences  of  the  tone 193 

8.  Differences  in  construction 193 

9.  Different  signification  of  the  same  word 194 

10.  Different  words  or  phrases  for  the  same  thing  or  thought.   .      194 

11.  Foreign  words  in  the  Akropong  and  other  Tshi  dialects      .      195 

12.  New  words  in  the  literary   dialect 196 


CORRECTIONS  AND  ADDITIONS. 

Page  29  line  14  read:  ton<isiiffcr'mg.  V.  56  (line  10  from  below):  Cf. 
§  245,  2.  belongs  to  §  89,  3 '(not  2).  P.  71  1.  9:  he  (takes...)  P.  94  in 
§144:  monko  o.  P.  95  in  §  147,  4:  jikye.  P.  1111.9:  (one  m'agya), 
P.  1 19  in  the  midst:  Icnythivays,  Unythwlsc.  P.  135  I.  3 :  fi  (for  fi).  P.  139 
1.15:  dukfi'  or  duku';  1.19:  wn  kyee  yeii  (own  maa  me= /«e  r//efZ 
iUat  I  may  die  likeicisc).  P.  155  last  line  of  §253:  273  (not  271).  P.  165 
in  §  67,  1   read:  excess  (for  extent). 

1^.  50  1.  1  add  4.  before  Numerals.  P.  lllS  1.  21  add  3.  before  In 
other  cases. . .  P.  63  in  §  98  yl  10  under  1,13  add  31, 13.  P.  47  add  to 
§  70,  2:  (Wodi  anammono,  they  eat  meat\  wodi  nam  moinono,  tliey  eat 
raw  meat).  P.  89  add  to  §  137  :  Cf.  §  273, c.  in  the  examples:  fearfully, 
wonderfully^  execssively,  eery  far. 


BASEL:    PRINTKl)    IJY    (J.    SCPtULTZE. 


to 
to 

Ml*    LO, 

»4 


r-* 


O: 


3 


t 

s 


o 


a 
u 

bO 


<C        H 


41 
•  I 


t 


Uoiversity  of  Toront 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "Ref .  Index  File" 
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


W    '^. 


".mm 


